BRAHMA SUTRAS

The systematic Vedanta of Shankara, in commentary on the aphorisms of Badarayana

Translated by Swami Vireswarananda (1936)
Source: Advaita Ashrama, Mayavati — https://archive.org/details/brahmasutras_SV

Swami Vireswarananda's 1936 translation, with the Sanskrit text, word-for-word translation, English rendering, and comments, published by Advaita Ashrama, Mayavati. Distributed under the Ramakrishna Order's long-standing policy permitting free reproduction of its translations of foundational texts for non-commercial spiritual study. Lightly modernised by Soul Spirit Self.

======================================================================

What follows is the complete text of the Brahma Sutras of Badarayana, with Sankara's interpretation, in Swami Vireswarananda's 1936 translation (Mayavati: Advaita Ashrama). The work runs to four chapters of four sections each — 555 sutras systematising the Upanishadic teaching that Sankara's commentary then unfolds. This edition gives the Sanskrit sutra, a word-for-word gloss, a running English translation, and Vireswarananda's notes drawing on Sankara's bhasya. Archaic English verb forms and pronouns have been lightly modernised; OCR artifacts and Devanagari-only lines have been removed.

-WITH TEXT, WORD-FOR-WORD TRANSLATION, ENGLISH RENDERING, COMMENTS AND INDEX

By SWAMI VIRESWARANANDA

_ ADVAITA ASHRAMA MAVAVATI, ALMORA, HIMALAYAS

Published by SwaMI VIRESWARANANDA ADVAITA ASHRAMA Mayavatt, Almora

ALI, RIGHTS RESERVED

COPYRIGHT REGISTERED UNDER ACT XX OF 1847

PRINTED BY N. MUKHERJEE, B.A. AT THE ART PRESS 20, BRITISH INDIAN STREET careuTra, (InDIA)

PREFACE

Some centres of the Ramakrishna Order have dor some years past been bringing out important scriptures of the Hindus with text, word for word sendcring, running translation and notes based on uthoritative commentaries, in order to make them ‘accesible to the English-knowing public whose knowledge of Sanskrit is limited. The Bhagavad- Gita by Swami Swarupananda published by the Advaita Ashrama, Mayavati, and eight major Upanishads by Swami Sharvananda published by the Ramakrishna Math, Madras, have already become popular. An edition of the Brahma-Sutras on similar lines was over-due. The present work is intended to fulfil this want and to complete in this series the Prasthanatraya according to the inter- pretations of Sankara. The word for word translation is very literal, but the running translation is made as literal as possible consistent with easy reading. In some places the translation of quotations from the Upanishads are taken from Max Miiller’s edition of the Upanishads and the quotations of the Sri Bhashya from Dr. Thibaut’s edition of the book (Sacred Books of the East Series), both with slight adaptations.

It is hoped the volume will be a fitting cont: panion to the other Sanskrit works published by the Ramakrishna Order. |

S.V.

ADVAITA ASHRAMA MAYAVATI, HIMALAYAS November 25, 1936

CONTENTS

Page INTRODUCTION sis sae es | ADHYASA OR SUPERIMPOSITION aa ee 3


CHAPTER I
---------

Section: 1 — ee?.. =. Section 11 aa ont... 66 Section II ae =.. 92 Section Iv ee 324... 180 CHaptTer II Section I ae es.. 158 Section Ii sss s... 198 Section 11 ite ios.. 28) Section IV ae sa... 270 CuaptTer III Section I bi ey 287 Section 1 — we ah 809 Section II sii me.. 844

Section Iv ng a.» 407

Cyapter IV Section I Section II Section 11 Section Iv

Index

Ac 7

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

Ait.... Aitareya Upanishad. Ait. Ar..... Aitareya Aranyaka. Brih.... Brihadaranyaka Upanishad. Chh..... Chhandogya Upanishad. Kath.... Katha Upanishad.

Kau.... Kausitaki Upanishad. Mbh.... Mahabharata.

Mai.... Maitrayani Upanishad. Mu.... Mundaka Upanishad. Pr.... Prasna Upanishad. Svet.... Svetasvatara Upanishad.

Taitt.... Taittirrya Upanishad.

INTRODUCTION

THE SIX SYSTEMS OF PHILOSOPHY

The Vedas are the scriptures of the Hindus, to whatever sect or denomination they may belong. They are the earliest extant religious literature to-day and form the corner-stone of the Indo-Aryan cultural edifice. The Hindus believe that the Vedas are not the utterances of any person but are eternal and owe their authority to no individual. They are not inspired but expired by God. These Vedas are divided into two sections, the Karmakanda and the Jnanakanda, the former dealing with the ritualistic and the latter with the knowledge portion of the Vedas. The latter section is also known as the Vedanta, the end of the Vedas or the goal or gist of the Vedas. These are not mere speculations but the record of the spiritual experiences of the race for centuries, actual realizations or superconscious per- ceptions.

Though we find Vedantic thought even in some of the earliest hymns of the Rig-Veda, e.g. the Nasadiya Sukta, which forms as it were the basis of later Upanishads, yet there is no denying the fact that the Indo-Aryans in their earlier days in India were given more to rituals and sacrifices. These were elaborated to such an extent by the Brahmanas, the priestly class, that persons of rationalistic bent of

ii BRAHMA-SUTRAS

mind revolted and questioned the very efficacy of the sacrificial religion. They engaged themselves in metaphysical problems and arrived at different solu- tions of the world. The Vedantic thought that was in germ form was now developed more and more, ard we have the Upanishads. This spirit of revolt against ritualism was carried on mainly by the Kshatriyas. The Indo-Aryans were very bold thinkers and nothing was sacrilegious to them in their search after truth. Traces of opposition against the religion cf the Vedas are found in the Vedas themselves. This tidal wave of rationalism in its extreme form gave rise to such schools of thought as the Charvakas, which were extremely materialistic and anti-religious.

In the age immediately preceding Buddha and during his lifetime there was a great religious and philosophical upheaval in India. From the Brahma- jala-Sutras we learn that in his time there were as many as sixty-two different schools of philosophy in India. We also learn from Buddhistic literature the names of a good number of teachers who were vener- ated in Aryadvarta at the time—names like Purina Kasyapa, Katyayana, Makkah Gosala, Nigantha Nathaputra, the founder of Jainism, and _ others. While these great souls represented Indian culture from an anti-Vedic standpoint there were many great names that represented the culture from the tradi- tional standpoint—names that are still venerated by Hindu religion and culture.

INTRODUCTION lil

The destructive criticism of everything in the old system by the Charvakas and others set the orthodox section to organize their belief on a more rationalistic basis and render it immune against all such criticism. This led to the foundation of the six systems of orthodox Hindu philosophy—orthodox' in the sense that they accepted the autuority of the Vedas in things transcendental-—while there were others who did not accept this authority and therefore were dubbed heterodox, though otherwise they too were the out- come of Upanishadic thought. The acceptance of the authority of the Vedas by these orthodox schools, however, does not mean that they accepted them in toto. Their allegiance to the Vedas varied widely and often it was too loose. Of the six orthodox schools, wiz. Nyaya, Vaiseshika, Sankhya, Yoga, Purva Mimamsaé and Uttara Mimamsa or Vedanta, the last two are intimately connected with the Vedas, which is one of the reasons why they are not mention- ed in the Jaina and Buddhistie literature, while the others are mentioned.

These six orthodox systems of thought developed side by side at different intellectual centres, of which there were a good number all over the country even during the Upanishadic period. Again in each system there were shades of difference. Thus for centuries philosophic thought developed in India till at last it

' Astika (orthodox) and Nastika (heterodox) had nothing to do with belief or non-belief in the existence of a God.; Sankhya and Mimamsa which did not accept an Iswara were yet regarded Astika (orthodox).

lv BRAHMA-SUTRAS

became so unwieldy that a regular systematization of each school of thought was found a great necessity. This led to the Sutra literature.

THE SUTRAS

These systematic treatises were written in short aphorisms called Sutras, meaning clues, and were intended as memory-aids to long discussions on any topic which the student had gone through with his teacher or Guru. The thought was very much condensed, for much was taken for granted. Conse- quently the maximum of thought was compressed into these Sutras in as few words as possible. Madhwa- charya quotes from Padma Purana a definition of the Sutra in his commentary on the Brahma-Sutras which runs as follows:

HemaAMaienst anNagangay |

weaaaaa 4 ai qafaal fag: ‘“‘People learned in Sutra literature say that a Sutra should be concise and unambiguous, give the essence of the arguments on a topic but at the same time deal with all aspects of the question, be free from repeti- tion and faultless.”” Though this definition states what a Sutra ought to be, in practice, however, the desire for brevity was carried to such extremes that most part of the Sutra literature is now unintelligible, and this is particularly so with respect to the Vedanta- Sutras which has consequently given rise to divergent systems.

INTRODUCTION Vv

There was Sutra literature in every branch of Indo-Aryan knowledge which had become cumbrous through centuries and required systematization. The authors of these Sutras, as we see, are not. the founders of the thought or systems they propounded, but are mere systematizers of the thought developed on the subject by successive generations of thinkers for centuries. The thought of these Sutras was much developed by later thinkers and even modified by them, though all of them disclaimed any originality in it, declaring that they were mercly interpreting the Sutras. This was specially the case with respect to the philosophical Sutras. All these subsequent thinkers belonged to one or other of the six systems and developed its traditionary thought from genera- tion to generation, rendering it more and more per- fect, and more and more secure against the ever new criticisms of rival schools. Such interpretations of the Sutras yave rise to various kinds of Ihterary writings like Vakvas, Vrittis, Karikis and Bhashyas, each of them being more and more elaborate than the previous ones.

THE BRATIMA-SUTRAS

The Upanishads do not contain any ready-made consistent system of thought. At first sight they secm to be full of contradictions. Hence arose the necessity of systematizing the thought of the Upanishads. Badardyana, to whom the authorship of the Rrahma-Sutras or Vedanta-Sutras is ascribed,

vi BRAHMA-SUTRAS

is not the only one who had tried to systematize the philosophy of the Upanishads. From the Brahma- Sutras itself we find that there were other schools of Vedanta which had their own following: We find the names of Audulomi, Kasakristna, Badari, Jaimini, Karshnajini, Asmarathya and others mentioned. All this shows that Badaradyana’s Sutras do not constitute the only systematic work in the Vedanta school, though probably the last and best. All the sects of India now hold this work to be the great authority and every new sect starts with a fresh commentary on it —without which no sect can be founded in this country.

THE AUTHOR AND DATE OF THE SUTRAS

About Badarayana, the author of the Sutras, very little is known to-day. Tradition, however, identifies him with Vyasa, the author of the Gita and the Mahabharata. Sankara, however, in his com- mentaries refers to Vydsa as the author of the Maha- bharata, and the author of the Sutras he refers to as Badaradyana. Perhaps to him these two personalities were different. His followers, Vachaspati, Anandagiri and others identify Vyasa and Badarayana, while Ramanuja and other commentators on the Sutras attribute it to Vyasa.

Deussen infers from the cross references in the works of Jaimini and Badarayana that they may have been combined by a later editor into one work, and provided with the cross references.

INTRODUCTION vil

This combined work, he says, was commented upon by Upavarsha on whose work the commentaries of Sabara on the Purva Mimaémsa and Sankara on the Uttara Mimamsa rest. Sankara’s commentary on 3.3.53 gives support to this last view and it also explains the popular idea that the two Mimamsias form one Sdstra. This combined work might well have been arranged by Vyasa, the author of the Mahabharata. Or it may be that he had written them himself according to the views that were tradi- tionally handed down as Badardyana’s. This latter view easily accounts for the reference to Badardyana by name in the Sutras. That such a thing was not uncommon in ancient India is established by Cole- brook on the authority of Indian commentators of Manu and Yajnavalkya.’| Max Miller also says that Badarfyana and other similar names are simply eponymous heroes of different philosophies.’

In support of the view that the two persons are one it can be pointed out that there existed in the time of Panini Sutras known as Bhikshu-Sutras which are identified by Vachaspati with the Vedanta-Sutras. The subject-matter of the Vedanta-Sutras being Brahman, the knowledge of which is pre-eminently meant for Sannyasins, it might well be called Bhikshu- Sutras. Panini in his Sutras ascribes these Bhikshu- Sutras to Pardsarya, the son of Parasara, 7t.c. Veda- Vyasa, who was also calicd Badaradyana as he had his

"The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy (1912 Impres-

Vili BRAHMA-SUTRAS

Ashrama at Badari in the Himalayas. That the Vedanta-Sutras and Purva Mimamsa-Sutras must have existed before Panini can also be inferred from the commentary on both of them by Upavarsha who is said to be the Guru of Panini in the Kathi-saut- sigar, though we must admit it cannot be conclusive- ly proved that the two Upavarshas are one and the same person.

The identity of the Vedanta-Sutras and_ the Bhikshu-Sutras would no doubt fix the date of the Sutras very early, before Buddha, and a question may arise how such an early work could have referred to various other schools of philosophy of a much later date and refuted them. In this connection we must not forget that the author of the Sutras does not refer to any founder of the different schools by name. He even does not use the technical terms of the different schools as they are known to us to-day. During that great philosophical ferment which followed at the close of the Upanishadic period various metaphysical views were held which later developed in definite channels. Therefore the fact that Badarayana 1s acquainted with certain systems of thought which later came to be associated with certain names does not show that Badarayana was later than these persons. These later names were by no means the original founders of these systems of thought, but only gave definite shape to some particular thought that was found in that mass of philosophical specula- tions which existed in that period. Badarayana could

INTRODUCTION ix

anticipate even the Buddhistic and Jaina schools, for Buddha and Mabavira also were not the founders of any altogether new schools of philosophy but imbibed much of the thought current in the country at the time. There was no revolutionary departure in their philosophy, but it was their great personality that shaped the history of India for centuries. As regards Jaina thought we know definitely that it existed from even before the tire of Parswanath (8th or 9th century B. C.). In fact all these systems must have belonged to the same period of philosophical ferment which preceded the rise of Buddhism. Thus a writer of the Vedanta-Sutras before Buddha may well be acquainted with the different schools of philosophy refuted in the Tarkapdda of that book, though they might not have existed in the form in which we know them to-day or in the form in which they have been refuted by Sankara.

Moreover, that the Vedanta-Sutras were known to exist’ before Buddha can also be made out from the Gita. The date of the Gita and the original Mahabharata, of which the Gita is a part, can be fixed before the time of Buddha. Both of them are pre-Buddhistic. for they contain no reference to Buddha and Buddhism. Quotations from both are found in Bodhayana who belongs to 400 B.C. The language of the Git4 also seems to belong to a period before Panini. He is also conversant with the epic characters. So we can well say that the GitA and the Mahabharata were known before Buddha. Now we

x BRAHMA-SUTRAS

find a clear reference to the Brahma-Sutras, in Git& 18.4, where the word ‘Brahma-Sutra-padaih’ occurs. This is a definite reference to the Vedanta-Sutras. The full text runs as follows: ‘‘This has been sung by the Rishis in various ways and in different metres. and definitely and logically by the words of the that the first half refers to teachings which are dis- connected and unsystematic and therefore refers to the Upanishads, while the later half to something definite and logical—a difference that is clearly brought out by this stanza and therefore refers to the systematized thought in the Vedanta-Sutras. Max Miller too is of opinion that the Vedanta-Sutras belong to an earlier period than the Gita' and in the text just quoted he finds a clear reference to the recognized title of the Vedanta or Brahma-Sutras. Indian commentators on the Gita like Ramanuja, Madhwa and others identify the Vedanta-Sutras in this passage of the Gita.

But if the Vedanta-Sutras be of an earlier date than the Gita, how could it contain references to the Gita? In Sutras 2.3.45 and 4.2.21 all the com- mentators quote the same text of the Gita, and there seems to be no doubt that they are right. These cross references show that the author of the Gita had a hand in the present recension of the Sutras. This is also made clear by the rejection of the fourfold

"The Six Systems of Indian Philosophy, p. 113.

INTRODUCTION xi

Vyuha of the Bhigavatas both by the Gita and the Sutras: and the great predominance given to the Sankhya school in both. The Gita accepts the Sankhya view of creation but modifies it to some extent and makes the Pradhana subservient to the Supreme Brahman which is non-dual. In_ the Vedanta-Sutras also the author refutes the dualism of the Sankhyas. Otherwise he has no objection to accepting the Pradhana or Frakriti as a principle dependant on the Supreme Lord (vide 1. 4. 2-8). Sankara in his Bhashya on these Sutras makes this quite clear.

From what has bcen said above we find that there are strong grounds for believing that the Vedanta- Sutras must have existed before Buddha and that if Badarayana and Veda-Vyaésa are not one and the same person as tradition holds, the latter must have had a hand in the present recension of the Sutras, though it is very difficult to say to what extent— whether it was by way of merely revising the original Sutras of Badarfyana or writing them down in toto after the teachings of Badarayana.

COMMENTATORS ON THE BRAHMA-SUTRAS

It has already been shown that the Brahma- Sutras of Badaradyana somehow gained prominence and popularity and as a result all the great Acharyas have written commentaries on it. The oldest of the extant commentaries 1s by Sankara, the exponent of Monism. A. Vritti by Upavarsha is mentioned by

Xi BRAHMA-SUTRAS

Sankara and Bhaskara and a Vritti by Bodhayana is referred to and often quoted by Ramanuja in his Sri Bhashya. Sankara does not refer to Bodhayana. According to Vedanta Desika the two are one person. Unfortunately this work of Bodhiyana is not avail- able now. Ramanuja quotes also from the Dramida Bhashya which evidently belongs to the Bhakti cult of Southern India. Sankara was followed by a host of commentators on these Sutras—Yadava Prakasha, Bhaskara, Vijnana Bikshu, Ramianuja, Nilakantha, Sripati, Nimbarka, Madhwa, Vallabha and Baladeva There are even some recent commentaries, though of not much value. All these try to maintain that their system is the one that Badaradyana propounded through his Sutras.

At present, however, only five of these great commentators have a large following—Sankara, the exponent of Monism; Ramanuja, the exponent of Visishtadvaita or qualified Monism; Nimbarka, the exponent of Bhedibhcdavada or the theory of differ- ence and non-difference; Madhwa, the exponent of Dualism; and Vallabha, the exponent of Suddhad- vaitavada. All of these systems seem to be based on the views of one or other of the ancient Vedanta schools which we find Badarayana referring to in his Sutras.

A question may be raised how the same work could have given rise to so many conflicting schools of thought. The reasons are many. In the first place the brevity of the Sutras leaves much to be supplied

INTRODUCTION xin

by the commentators, and in the absence of an universally accepted unbroken tradition each is free to do this according to his own pre- conceived ideas. Sumetimes even without supply- ing anything the same Sutra is capable of being interpreted differently and even conveying quite the opposite meaning (e.g. Senkara and Ramaénuja on 3.2.11) by the mere shifting of the stops. Again, while there is a tradition which is accepted more or less by all as regards the arrangement into chapters and sections, there is no such accepted tradition as regards the division into Adhikaranas (topics), nor is there anything authoritative to guide us as to which Sutras form the Purvapaksha or the prima facie view and which give the Siddhanta or the author’s view. So every one is_ free to divide the Sutras into topics according to his own choice and regard any Sutras as giving the author’s view. Then again, the Sutras do not give any reference as to which texts of the scriptures are being discussed and as a result the commentator is free to select any texts from that vast repertory, so much so that it often happens that different com- mentators see different topics discussed in the same set of Sutras. Added to all this is the difficulty that Badarayana is often silent as regards his own decision and that on fundamental questions. He merely gives the views of different Vedantins and ends the topic

The five great commentators more or less agree

XiV BRAHMA-SUTRAS

on certain points, especially where the author attacks the principles of the non-Vedantic schools. All of them agree that Brahman is the cause of this world and that knowledge of It leads to final emancipation which is the goal to be attained; also that Brahman ean be known only through the scriptures and not through mere reasoning. But they differ amongst themselves as to the nature of this Brahman, Its causality with respect to this world, the relation of the individual soul to It and the condition of the soul in

the state of release.

Brahman according to Sankara is attributeless, immutable, Pure Intelligence. Iswara according to him is a product of Maya—the highest reading of the Nirguna Brahman by the individualized soul. The world is a Vivarta or apparent transformation through Maya of the Nirguna Brahman but not in reality. The Jiva in reality is all-pervading and identical with Brahman, though as individualized by its Upadhi (adjunct), the internal organ, it regards itself as atomic, as an agent, and as a part of the Lord. The knowers of the Nirguna Brahman attain It directly and have not to go by “‘the path of the gods’’. It is the knowers of the Saguna Brahman that go by that path to Brahmaloka from where they do not return but attain Brahman at the end of the cycle. Knowledge is the only means to Liberation.

To Ramanuja and the other commentators Brahman is not attributeless but an _ essentially Personal God possessing infinite benign attributes.

INTRODUCTION XV

They hold that though personality as we experience it in man is limited, it need not be imvariably connected with personality as Sankara thinks, so as to eontradict infinity. They do not accept the Maya doctrine, for to them the world is real, and so they accept that the world is produced from Brahman. Madhwa, however, accepts It only as the efficient cause and not as the material cause also. The Jiva according to them is really atomic, an agent, and a part of the Lord. The knower of Brahman goes by the path of the gods to Brahmaloka where he attains Brahman and does not return to this mortal world. They do not make any distinction of higher and lower knowledge like Sankara. According to them Bhakti is the chief means to Liberation, and not Jnana.

Thus to all of them Brahman, the world, and the souls are all realities. Pamanuja integrates the three into one organic whole and says that Brahman has for Its body the other two. Nimbarka integrates the three by his Bhedabhedavada, 7.e. the relation of the sentient and insentient world with Brahman is one of difference and non-difference. Madhwa, a thorough- going dualist, regards these three as quite independ- ent, eternal entities, though Brahman is the ruler of the other two. To Vallabha the world and the souls are Brahman Itself. They are real and their relation to Brahman is one of identity, as that of parts to a whole.’

 For details, see the various Bhashyas on Sutras 1. 1. 2, 1. 4 23, 26, 2. 1. 26-28, 2. 3. 18-53, 8. 2. 11-30, 4. 2. 12-14,

XV1 ' BRAHMA-SUTRAS

SANKARA’S INTERPRETATION OF THE SUTRAS

There is a strong opinion current amongst scholars to-day that whatever be the merit of Sankara’s metaphysical doctrines considered by themselves or even as doctrines elucidating the teachings of the Upanishads, he is not faithful to Badarayana in his interpretation of the Sutras. They hold that Bada- rayana was ignorant of a twofold Brahman and conse- quently of a twofold knowledge; that he was not aware of the doctrine of Maya and so did not hold that the world was unreal, but that Brahman under- went a real change into this world-order; and that the Sutras do not hold the view of absolute identity of the individual soul and Brahman. In short their view is that the system of Badarayana is a theistic system which has more affinities with the systems of Raéamanuja and Nimbarka than with Sankara’s pure Non-dualism. This view is nothing new. Bhaskara at the beginning of his commentary on the Sutras accuses Sankara of this very thing. But at the same time we can also cite Sandilya, the author of the Bhakti-Sutras, who in Sutra 30 of his work refers to Badarayana as a Monist, which shows that the view that Badarayana was an Abhedavadin was prevalent in ancient days, even as early as the Sutra period.

It is not possible to deal with such a controversial subject in a short Introduction like this. All the same we shall take some salient points connected with this discussion and try to see how far such a criticism against Sankara is justified. At the outset, however,

INTRODUCTION xvit

it is fair to admi. that at places Sankara’s interpreta- tions secm to ke far-fetched; but this is by no means a defect of his Bhashya alone but of all the other extant Bhashyas as well. Moreover, in such a critical study we shall not gain much if we follow the letter of the Sutras, missing the general spirit of the work as a whole. It is possible to give a consistent inter- pretation of the Sutras by following the letter of the Sutras and at the same time miss the general spirit of the work as a whole.

qhatvatarrae: wediseary aed Aaa | “The Sruti texts give rise to a wrong view if they are not studied as one connected whole’’—in other words the letter often kills the spirit.

Sutra 2 aims at a Nirguna Brahman:

To start with, let us take the definition of Brahman given by Badarayana in Sutra 2. Sutra 1 says that Brahman is to be inquired into, for the knowledge of It leads to Moksha (Liberation). The next Sutra defines Brahman and so naturally we have to understand that the Brahman the knowledge of which gives Moksha is defined here. As such we get a Saguna Brahman as the subject-matter of the Sastra and not the Nirguna Brahman of Sankara which is Existence, Knowledge, Bliss Absolute. So it appears that the author at the very beginning of the work precludes any chance of Sankara’s doctrine being read in his Sutras. But let us investigate into

B

xviii BRAHMA-SUTRAS

the matter a little and see whether it is actually so.

After the statement in Sutra 1 that Brahman is to be known, naturally the question about the nature of Brahman arises. The Sutrakara (aphorist) here Anticipates an objection that Brahman cannet be defined at all. For whatever we cognize in this world is limited and as such cannot be a characteristic of Brahman which is infinite. A limited thing cannot define an unlimited thing. Nor can any characteris- tic which is absolutely beyond our experience, like Reality etc., défine Brahman, for it is only a well- known characteristic that defines a thing and dis- tinguishes it from other things. Again the scriptures cannot define Brahman, for being absolutely unique It cannot be expressed in speech. Thus in the absence of any definition Brahman cannot be a thing worth inquiring into and cannot serve any human purpose. To refute all such objections the Sutrakara defines Brahman in Sutra 2. Granted that the world we experience cannot define Brahman as being a quality of It or as being identical with It, yet the quality of being the (supposed) cause of the world may indicate It. ‘‘Birth ete.’? mentioned in the Sutra define Brahman per accidens. “Though they inhere in the world and do not pertain to Brahman, the causality connected therewith pertains to Brahman and therefore the definition holds good. This causality indicates Brahman even as the snake indicates the rope when we say that that which is the snake is the rope, where the rope is indicated

INTRODUCTION XiX

by the snake owing to the illusory connection between the two. This definition, therefore, actually aims at the Nirguna Brahmar and cannot be taken as a definition of the Saguna Brahman.’

Again the Sutra refers to the Taittiriya text, ‘That. from which these beings are born... That is Brahman’’ etc. (8.1) and the wurd ‘that’ here refers to the Brahman defined as Existence, Knowledge, and Infinite in the immediately preceding section, the Ananda Valli. Therefore from this text itself we get at the real nature of Brahman.

Yet it may be questioned why the author should give an indirect definition of Brahman instead of defining It in Its reai nature as, ‘Existence, Knowl- edge, Bliss is Brahman.’’ The answer is that the author has followed here the universally accepted principle of taking a student step by step from a lower to a higher truth, from a grosser to a subtler one. it is indeed by first pointing to the end of the branch of a trec that one points out the moon to the child. Similarly, first Brahman as the Cause is distinguished from this world of products, and finally by saying that from Bliss this universe is born, It is differentiated from other probable causes like atoms, the Pradhana, etc. In this way finally Brahman’s real nature as distinguished from every- thing else is described. The aspirant whose mind is turned away from the world of the senses first

 Bhamati and Ratnaprabha on Sankara’s comments on Sutra 9.

XX BRAHMA-SUTRAS

comprehends Brahman as the cause of the world. Though in Itself as the Inner Self Brahman is im- mediate, yet we have the idea that It 1s remote. Hence the Sruti first teaches that Brahman is the cause of the world, and then to remove this false notion of remoteness it teaches that It is one with the Inner Self. So long as this identity is not realized, It appears to be the cause of the world.

That Bliss which admits of no difference is Brahman we learn from the Chhandogya Upanishad. ‘The Bhuman (infinite) only is Bliss. This Infinite we must desire to understand”’ (7, 23. 1). What is this Infinite which is called Bliss? The Upanishad explains: ‘‘Where one sees nothing else, hears nothing else, understands nothing else, that is the Infinite. Where one sees something else, hears some- thing else, understands something else, that is the finite. The Intinite is immortal, the finite 1s mortal’’ (Ibid. 7. 24. 1). This non-dual Bliss is the Infinite, the Brahman defined in Ananda Valli as Existence’, Knowledge, Infinite is Brahman, and from this all creation springs—so understood Bhrigu, the son of Varuna.

Again the Taittiriya text, “That from which all.beings are born... Try to know that. That is Brahman,”’’ aims at defining a non-dual Brahman as the only reality and does not define a Saguna Brah- man. It defines Brahman as the efficient and also as the material cause of the universe, since It is the place of dissolution of the world. Being the material

INTRODUCTION XX1

cause of everything, It is the basic reality behind everything and this gives rise to the intuition that Braiman is non-dual and that everything else is unreal. Its peing the efficient cause also establishes the fact that It is non-dual, as it precludes anything else being such an efficient causc. Thus this defini- tion, which is but one, qualifies per accidens the non- dual Brahman as both the efficient and material cause of the universe. This materiai causality of Brahman which Js non-dual, immutable Intelligence cannot be one of origination, as by primeval atoms by whose combination something new is created; nor can it be one of modification, as of the Pradhana of the Sankhyas. It is through Vivarta or apparent modi- fication through Maya or Nescience that Brahman is transformed into this universe. This universe 1s therefore illusory.’ Thut this is in accordance with Badardyana’s view is made clear by the fact that he uses the word ‘Sat’ as a characteristic epithet to denote Brahman, which he would not have done if he had considered the Jivas and the world also real like Brahman (vide Sutra 2. 3.9). The word ‘Sat’ here is interpreted by all commentators to denote Brahman.

Thus we find that this definition is given by Badarayana to indicate a Nirguna (attributeless) and Nirvisesha (absolute) Brahman and not a Saguna Brahman and he has selected a significant text from

’ Siddhantalesha, Brahma Lakshanavichara.

XX1i BRAHMA-SUTRAS

the wide range of scriptural texts for defining his Brahman.

Is Brahman the real or apparent cause of the world?

Now let us take up the Sutras about the causal- ity of Brahman, viz. Sutras 1. 4. 23-27 and Sutra 2. 1. 14. Before that let us have a brief summary of the work up to 2. 1. 14. After defining Brahman in Sutra 2 the Sutrakara from 1. 1. 5 to 1. 4. 18 and in 1. 4, 23-27 shows that all the scriptural texts teach that Brahman is both the efficient and the material cause of the universe, refuting the Sankhyas refute the Sankhyan objection that there are con- tradictions in the Sruti texts with respect to the First Cause. Finally Sutra 28 says that by what has been said against the Sankhyas the others also are refuted. Sutras 2. ]. 1-3 reject the authority of the Sankhya and Yoga Smritis as against the scriptures. Sutras 4-11 answer through reasoning without the aid of texts the Sankhyan objection based on reasoning that Brahman cannot be the material cause of the world, for It and the world are of different nature and as such the relation of cause and effect cannot exist between them. Sutra 12 refutes the validity of reasoning in matters transcendental and thus refutes all schools which arrive at their doctrines through reasoning. Sutra 13 answers another objection of the Sankhyas that if Brahman be the material cause, then there would result non-distinction between en-

INTRODUCTION XX

joyer and things enjoyed, a fact established by ex- perience. The Sutra refutes it. saying that such a difference can exist in non-different things even as we have waves, foam, ete. in the sea and so the Vedantic doctrine cannot be set aside on the ground of cuntradiction to our experience. Now, duality and non-duality cannot exist in one and the same thiny, for they are mutually contradictory. The example of the sea and the waves would be apt if Brahman had aspects, but non-dual reality does not admit of such aspects. Moreover, Sutra 13 has not established the truth of the scriptural statement, ‘‘By the knowledge of the one everything else is known’? which was referred ‘to in Sutra 1. 4. 23. To establish these two things Sutras 14-20 declare that the effects ave in reality non-different from the cause, 7.e€. they have no existence apart from the cause.’ Non-difference here does not mean identity but that there is no difference.” In other words the two, Brahman and the world, have not the same grade of reality.” That is what is meant. If the world is something different from Brahman it would contradict such Sruti texts as, ‘All this was but the Self?’ (Brih. 1. 4. 1., 1. 4. 17). Again if the world is real, it would contradict texts like, ‘‘There is nothing whatsoever here’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 19). Therefore the world is non-different from Brahman. But identity

"Sankara on Sutra 14.. Bhamati on Sutra 14.  Siddhantalesha, Brahmakaranatvavichara.

XXIV BRAHMA-SUTRAS

is not what is meant by non-difference, for this is impossible between the world and Brahman, they being mutually different in nature. Hence non- difference means that it has no existence apart from Brahman, it precludes difference. The denial of identity, however, does not establish the difference of the world and Brahman, but establishes the apparent identity or the illusory nature of the world, even as the illusory snake is seen in the rope. This is what the Chhandogya text 6. 1. 4 tries to teach. Thus only by the knowledge of one thing can every- thing be known, on any other assumption 1t would be impossible to establish it. The non-difference of the world from Brahman being established, the question naturally arises that Brahman would then be responsible for creating evil for the Jiva which 1s one with It. This is answered in Sutras 2. 7. 21-238. Sutras 24-25 show how Brahman, though destitute of materials and instruments, vet is the cause of the world even as milk turns into curds without any extrancous help. The example cited raises a fresh objection in Sutra 26 that Brahman cannot at the same time be both immutable and be transformed into the world. Against this Sutra 27 says that the Sruti states both these views and so they have to be accepted, as the Sruti is the only authority with respect to Brahman. As to how these two views are to be reconciled, Sutra 28 says that even as in the individual soul diverse creation exists in the dream state without

INTRODUCTION XXV

marring its indivisibility, so also this world springs from Biahman. This example which is cited 1s very significant as 1t shows that Badarayana was quite familiar with Mayfivada—that he considered this world unreal in a highcr sense even as the dream world is Mayda (8. 2. 8). These two Sutras together with Sutras 2. 3. 50 and 8. 2. 18 show that he viewed the world as unreal. The subsequent Sutras establish that Prahman throrgh Maya possesses all powers necessary for creation und so on.

In the above summary we find how logically and consistently Sankara has interpreted the Sutras which leaves no roora for dispute as to what Badara- yana meant in these Sutras.

Thus in the whoie of Chapter I and Section 1 of Chapter IT Badarayana establishes the efficient and material causality of Brahman and in this his oppo- nents are primarily the Sankhyas who deny Its material causality. As they also quote the scriptures often in their support. they are the foremost opponents in Badardyana’s view. He disposes of others by say- ing that they too are refuted by these arguments. Sankara also, as shown above, has in Ch. I, Sec. 4+ and Ch..II, Sec. 1 consistently interpreted the Sutras as directed against the Sankhyas or as answering their objections.

Some critics of Sunkara, however, think that the reasoning employed by the aphorist against the Sankhyas in Sutras 4-11 of Ch. II, Sec. 1. especially Sutra 6, weuld be hardly appropriate from Sankara’s

XxXV1 BRAHMA-SUTRAS

point of view, for according to him the world springs not from Brahman as Intelligence, but in so far as It is associated with Maya. Similarly Sutra 24 which says that Brahman transforms Itself into the world like milk would be inappropriate if the world were unreal; Sutra 1]. 4. 23 where Brahman is said to be the material and efficient cause of the world does not say that Brahman is the material cause through Maya; on the other hand Sutra 1. 4. 26 uses the word ‘Parinamat’ to show how Brahman is changed into the world.

This criticism does not seem to be relevant. In Sutras 2. 1. 4-11 the Saénkhyas’ objection against the Vedantic doctrine of the material causality of Brah- man is answered. Here the author is concerned only with establishing Brahman as the material cause and thus refuting the dualism of the Sankhyas who posit an independent principle, the Pradhana, as the First Cause, and not with the true nature of this causality. Up to Sutra 13 he refutes the objection from the Sankhyas’ own realistic standpoint. His own view as to the true significance of the causality is established in Sutra 14. It is not true that Sankara holds that Brahman as Pure Intelligence is not the material cause, but only as endowed with Maya. Brahman or Pure Intelligence as such is the material cause of the world as Sutra 1. 4. 28 says. But because of this, we cannot expect the effect, the world, to be similar to the cause in all respects. This is made clear by Sankara in his commentary op Sutra 2.1.6

INTRODUCTION XXVii

Where he says that they cannot be similar in all res- pects, for if thew were, then there would be nothing like cause and effect, nor would they be called by different names. What is essential for establishing the relation of cause and effect is that some qualities of the cause must be found in the effect also, and this is satisfied in the case of Brahman and the world. Everything in this world exists and this quality is obtained f-om Brahman which is existence; everything is also illumined by Intelligence which is Brahman. So Sutra 1. 4. 23 which says that Brahman as Intelligence is the cause is not contradicted accord- ing to Sankara’s view. This Sutra futher says, ‘This view not contradicting the proposition and illustration cited in Chh. 6. 1. 4.’’ In what sense the material causality of Brahman as Intelligence does not contra- dict this enunciation, is shown by the aphorist in 2.1.14. From these Sutras Sankara says that both Brahman and Maya are the cause of the world. Brah- man through Vivarta, and Maya through Parinama; and the qualities of both are found in the effect, the world, as we gather from our cognition of a pot, ‘The pot exists,’ ‘The pot is inert’ where as existence the pot is indentical with Brahman which is existence itself, and as inert it is identical with Maya which is inert. Everything in this world has five elements in its make-up, viz. Asti, Bhati, Priya, Nama, and Rupa, the former three have Brahman for its material cause corresponding to the three factors, Existence, Intelli- gence and Bliss, and the last two consist of Maya and

XXVIll BRAHMA-SUTRAS

are unreal. No doubt the aphorist takes the Pari- nama view as a workable basis in refuting the San- khyas. But we have already said that it is a well established principle of Indian teachers to take the aspirant step by step to the final truth. So Badara- yana, by taking the Parindma view-point in his earlier Sutras where Brahman is referred to as the Cause and establishing Vivarta in 2. 1. 14, has only followed this universally accepted method. That the author is not for Parinadmavada is made clear by him in Sutras 26-28. Sutra 28 clearly establishes the unreality of the world, it being illusory like the dream world. Coming to Ramanuja’s commentary we find that he is not so logical or consistent as Sankara. Accord- ing to him Brahman has for Its body the entire universe with all its sentient and insentient beings in all Its states. When the souls and matter are in the subtle state, Brahman is in the causal condition and when they are in the gross state It is in the effect state. The effect, i.e. the world, is thus seen to be non-different from the cause, i.e. the Supreme Brahman (vide Sri Bhashya Sutras 1. 4. 27 and 2. 1. 15). Badardyana does not seem to hold this view, for nowhere does he say that Brahman has for Its body the souls and matter. Even if 2. 3. 43 should mean that the souls are the body of Brahman, there is no similar Sutra to show that matter too is Its body. Moreover, if Brahman is the material cause of the world through Its insentient part only, as the above view leads to, then Sutra 1. 4. 23 which

INTRODUCTION XXX

says that Brahman as Imielligence is the material cause would be contradicted and Sutras 2. 1. 26-28 also would be useless, for the question of the whole of Brahman passing over into the world does not arise at all. Nor can the relation of cause and effect exist between Brahman in the causal and the effect state for it is the same Brahman in either case. Even if such a relationship be granted, it would make Sutras 2. 1. 4-6 mcaningless, for there can be no difference of nature in Brahman in the two states as between Brahman and the world—the sentient and the insentient. Ramanuja directs Sutra 14 against the Vaiseshikas, but we do not find the author making anybody else but the Sankhyus the opponents. The rest he disposes of by saying that the arguments against the Sankhyas refute others also (vide 1. 4. 28 and 2. 1. 12). The interpretation of Sutra 2. 1. 28 by Ramanuja is very far-fetched. His explana- tion that because things possess different qual- ities owing to the difference in their essential nature, Brahman which is unique can possess qualities beyond our experience, is not to the point, while Sankara’s interpretation is very happy as it gives us an idea as to how it is possible for Brahman to create the world and yet remain immutable. Moreover, Raéamaéanuja has not explained in Sutras 26-28 the con- tradiction in the Sruti texts, while Sankara’s interpre- tation reconciles the contradiction through reasoning, and such reasoning as is not against the Sruti texts is quite acceptable to all Vedantins; in fact that is what

XXX BRAHMA-SUTRAS

the author proposes to do in this Uttara-Mimamsa work of his.

Coming to Nimbarka, his line of argument on these Sutras relating to the causality of Brahman is to establish the Bhedabheda doctrine. Sutra 2. 1. 18 he interprets first like Sankara. But in Sutra 14 the word ‘sa#qaq he interprets as ‘a 4 waufaaaa ‘not absolutely different.” That is, the effect is not absolutely differnt from the cause: it has no separate existence from Brahman. Thus from Sutra 13 which says that Brahman and the Jiva are different, Sutras 4-6 which say that the insentient world is different from It and Sutra 14 which says that they have no separate existence apart from Brahman, Nimbarka concludes that between Brahman and the sentient and insentient world there is difference as well as non-difference. But such a thing in one and the same entity is impossible. The Chhandogya text says that the clay alone is real and not the things made of clay, for they are mere names, unreal. Take for example a clay pot; when we cognize it as a pot we are not conscious of its being clay and when we cognize it as clay we miss the pot, though both these aspects are inherent in it. So we have to con- clude that its nature is illusory, for it 1s not cognized as what it is. That which is non-different from a thing and yet appears to be different and which depends upon the non-difference for its existence can- not but be illusory. So between the pot and the clay, the latter alone is real and not the pot.

INTRODUCTION XXX1

Similar is the ease with Brahman and the world. Brahman alone js real and the world is unreal. ‘“When all this is but the Self, huw could one see another?”? (Brih. 2. 4. 14). Chhandogya 6. 16 calls one who sees variety as fulse-minded and the one who sees unity as true-minded. But to people who are in ignorance both difference and non-difference seem to be real, the unity being understood through the scriptures and variety through direct perception. This is only a relative or Vyavaharika state. The truth is unity. Therefore Nimbarka’s view cannot he correct.

Does Badardyana accept the Pénchardtra view?

In Section 2 of Chapter iI the author takes the offensive. So long he was on the _ defensive. In the whole of this section he refutes through reasoning alone, without recourse to the Sruti texts, the various schools of philosophy of the time. In this section he refutes those schools of thought that were regarded by the ortho- dox section as outside the sphere of the Vedas. We have enough references in ancient works like the Mahabharata and some of the Puranas that all these schools refuted in Section 2 by the author were so regarded. The Siva Mahimna Stotra contains the verse ‘ait aie aia: qacfraa awafafe’, which shows that Sankhya, Yoga, Pasupata and Vaishnava (which includes Pancharatra) schools of thought were

XXX1i BRAHMA-SUTRAS

regarded as different from ag{ or the Vedic religion with its two branches, Karmakaénda and Jnanakanda. Moreover, we find that in many works of the Pancha- ratra school the Vedas are held in contempt. Sankara himself quotes such a text. The scholiasts Govinda- nanda and Anandagiri also quote similar texts. Therefore they must have been definitely regarded by the ancients as outside the pale of the Vedas and we cannot reasonably expect Badaradyana to have accepted their view as his final conclusion in a work meant to systematize the orthodox thought of the Upanishads. Of course, to that portion which does not contradict the Vedas he has no objection; nor has Sankara, as he has made it clear in his Bhashya on Sutras 42 and 483. Ramanuja, however, sees in Sutras 44 and 45 the acceptance of the Pancharatra doctrine by a refutation of the objections raised against it in Sutras 42-43. But his interpretations are stretched. Sutra 45 he twists to mean, ‘And because the creation of the soul is contradicted by this Sastra’’, saying thereby that the question raised in Sutra 42 as to the creation of the soul does not arise at all, as this school does not hold the view. The way in which this Sutra is stretched by Rama- nuja can easily be seen by comparing it with Sutra 10 where Badardyana uses the same wording, ‘‘And on account of contradiction,’’ etc. to mean that con- tradiction in the Sankhya system makes it unaccept- able to the wise. This seems to be the Sutrakara’s view here also. Dr. Thibaut thinks, ‘It would not

INTRODUCTION XXXiil

be unnatural proceeding to close the polemical section with a defence of that doctrine which in spite of objections has to be viewed as the true one.’’ But that being the purpose of the whole work itself, we cannot reasonably think that the author establishes his doctrine in these two Sutras. Moreover, no other commentator sees the acceptance of the Pancharatra doctrine in this topic. Vallabha follows Sankara. Nimbarka sees the cefutation of Saktivada in the topic. He is therefore consistent in that he regards the whole of Section 2 as being devoted to a refutation of views not acceptable to the author. He accepts the Pancharatra system and so he finds some other subject in this topic, though on this account his inter- pretation is not happy. But if Vyasa had any hand in this work as already shown, then we cannot but see the refutation of the Pancharatra system in these Sutras, for we find that he does not accept this doctrine even in his Gita.

The Jiva’s reai nature:

Now we come to Sutras 2. 3. 16-53 which deal with the nature of the soul and its relation to Brahman. All] except Sankara interpret these Sutras to mean that the soul is atomic, an agent, and a part of the Lord. Sankara alone says that the atomicity, agency, and being a part are not the Jiva’s real nature, but its nature as a Samsdarin (transmigrating entity) and that in reality it is all-pervasive and identical with Brahman,

XXXIV BRAHMA-SUTRAS

The author defines Brahman as the cause etc. of this world of sentient and insentient things in Sutra 2, referring to the Taittiriya text, ‘‘That out of which all these creatures are born’’ etc. (3. 1). It is clear, therefore, that the world of sentient and insentient things has sprung from Brahman. Hence the Jivas too have sprung from the Lord. But in Sutra 17 the author says that the individual soul is not produced. Thus he contradicts his definition and also the enunciation of the scriptures that ‘‘by the knowledge of one thing everything else is known”’ (Chh. 6. 1). The Sutrakara at every place makes this enunciation the corner-stone of his argument. So we have to reconcile it and the author’s definition of Brahman with his statement in Sutra 17 which drives us to the conclusion that the Jiva as such, as a Samsarin, is an effect, but in its real nature it is eternal and identical with Brahman. That the nature of the Jiva as we experience it is unreal is made clear by him in Sutra 16. What originates is its connection with its adjuncts, gross and subtle, which is unreal. From this standpoint it is also clear why the author treats the question of the Jiva’s nature and its relation to Brahman in this section which reconciles contradic- tions in the Sruti texts with respect to creation. There are different statements about the nature of the Jiva also and these he reconciles in this section, showing thereby that in its real nature it is not created and is identical with Brahman, but as a Samsarin it is an effect, atomic, an agent, and a part of Brahman.

INTRODUCTION XXXV

Even as Iswara or Brahman limited by Nescience is not eternal, so is tie Jiva limited by the body, mind, etc. not eternal, but in its true nature it is eternal. Rereft of their Upadhis both are Pure Intelligence and identical. That is why the Taittiriya Upanishad after sayiny, ‘‘Existence, Knowledge, infinite is Brahman’”’ (2. 1) says, From That verily—-from this Self—is the ether born’’ ete. (2. 1), thus identifying the self as bereft of all its Upadhis with Brahman. Taittiriya 2. 1, and 8. 1 cited by the Sutrakara in his definition of Brahman all refer to the same Pure Intelligence. Thus the one ‘Existence, Knowl- edge, Infinite’ which is Pure Intelligence, reflected in Nescience is Iswara, and reflected in the Antah- karana (internal organ) is the Jiva, which is borne out by the scriptural statement, ‘“‘This Jiva has the effect for the adjunct and Iswara has the cause for the adjunct”? (Sukharahasya Up. 2. 12). This seems to be the true view-point which has guided the aphorist in fraraing the Sutras of Section 3, Chapter IT and in which sense Sankara also has interpreted them. The enunciation also is not contradicted according to this interpretation.

According to Ramanuja the souls are really effects of Brahman but have existed in It from all eternity as a mode or Prakara of Brahman. So also have the elements. Yet the latter are said to originate, as at the time of creation they undergo an essential change of nature. But the souls do not undergo such a change, they are always cognizing

XXXVI BRAHMA-SUTRAS

agents, but at the time of creation there is an expan- sion of their intelligence and in this sense alone, i.e. in the sense that there is no essential change in their nature at creation, are the souls said to be not created (vide Sri Bhashya 2. 3. 18) while the elements which undergo change in their essential nature are said to be created. Badardyana nowhere says that the souls and Prakriti which form the body of Brahman are Its effects; nor does he anywhere declare such a difference between the souls and the elements. Again, according to Ramanuja Brahman means not pure Being but as qualified by the souls and matter for Its body. This very conception of Brahman establish that the relation between the souls and Brahman is as between a quality and the thing qualified and consequently 2. 8. 43 is redundant if the word ‘part’ there should be interpreted to convey this idea.

Ramanuja sees a refutation of Advaita in Sutras 50-53. This does not seem to be intelligible at all, for the Advaitins do not say that the Jiva is all- pervading in its relative state. It is so in the state of release. Sankara makes it clear that the Jiva as such is limited and subject to injunctions and pro- hibitions, through its connection with a gross body (2. 3. 48), and that even after the gross body falls, on account of its finer Upadhis, the Antahkarana etc. which accompany it even after death (4. 2. 1-6), it still continues to be individualized (2. 8. 80), and so there is no confusion in fruits of actions done in the

INTRODUCTION XXXVIi

gross body (2. 3. 49 and 50). It is only when this Upadhi also, which being something created and not eternal (vide 2. 4) and therefore liabie to destruction, is rent asunder, that the Jiva attains its real nature and is all-pervading. As such, Ramapuja’s refutation of Advaita falls flat. Sankara’s interpretation of these Sutras on the other hand is happy. The Sutrakara, having established that the Jiva in its relative state is atomic and an agent but in reality all-pervading, refutes the view of those who hold that the Jivas are many and all-pervading in their relative state itself. Nimbarka and Vallabha also see the same subject in this topic which shows that Rama- nuja’s attempt to refute Advaita is far-fetched and not at all what the Sutrakara (aphorist) means.

Nimbarka too regards the Jivas and Prakriti as effects of Brahman; but while matter undergoes further modification after creation, the souls do not and in this sense the soul is said to be eternal by him also. Such a view stands refuted by the same arguments as are applied against Ramanuja’s view. Coming to Sutra 43 which says the Jiva is different as well as non-different from Brahman, it has already been shown by Sankara in 2. 1. 14 that such a thing is not possible in the same entity and that non- difference alone is real.

Let us now conclude this topic by considering the reasonableness or otherwise of taking Sutras 19-28 as the decisive view of the author. According to this view the soul is atomic, for the Sruti declares it

XXXVUi BRAHMA-SUTRAS

to be so (Mu. 8. 1. 9) and other texts mention its passing out of the body, going to heaven, etc. But then the Sruti also describes the Supreme Self as atomic in texts like, ‘Smaller than a grain of rice, smaller than a grain of barley’’ etc. (Chh. 8. 14. 8). So how can we say that the Jiva alone is atomic and not the Lord? It may be said that texts say that. Brahman is all-pervading. ‘‘All-pervading like the ether and eternal’? etc.; ‘Greater than the sky, greater than heaven”’ etc. But then the Sruti texts describe the soul also as all-pervading: ‘‘He is indeed the great unborn Self’? (Brih. 4. 4. 22); ‘‘Just as when a pot is carried, the pot alone is carried, not the ether inside it, even so is the Jiva compared to the ether,’? which expressly says it is all-pervading. Nor will it serve any purpose to say that Brahman, being the material cause of the world, must be all-pervasive, for even the atomic Jiva creates several bodies (Kayavyuha) and rules them and so Brahman though the material cause can yet be atomic. So neither by the Sruti texts nor by reasoning can the differentiation of Brahman and the Jiva as all- pervasive and atomic be justified. But according to Advaita there is no disparity in its reasoning in the two cases. Brahman due to Upadhi (adjunct) appears atomic but in reality It is all-pervasive. So also is the Jiva in its real nature all-pervading and therefore identical with Brahman, though it appears to be atomic, an agent and so on owing to its limiting adjunct, the Antahkarana. The primary texts say

INTRODUCTION XXXix

that Brahman and the Jiva in its real nature are all-pervading. Tne texts which speak of atomicity etc. are of a secundary import and so have to be explained otherwise.'

Is Brahman with or without attributes:

Now let us take up the Sutras in Chapter III, Section 2, where Badarayana describes the nature of Brahman. Sutras 11-21 according to Sankara deal with the reconciliation of texts which describe Brahman both as attributeless and as possessing attributes and mean that even from difference of place a twofold characteristic cannot be predicated of Brahman, because the scriptures teach throughout that Brahman is without attributes (11). [If it be said that such difference is taught by the scriptures we deny it, because with respect to each form the Sruti declares just the opposite of that. The Sruti explains ut every instance that the form is not true and that behind all Upadhis there is one formless principle (vide Brih. 2. 5. 1) (12). Moreover, some teach thus (vide Katha. 4. 11) (18). Verily Brahman is formless, for that is the purport of the texts (14). And as formless light takes form, so does Brahman take form in connection with Upadhis which serve the purpose of Upasana (meditation) (15). It is Pure Intelligence (16). The Sruti and Smriti teach that It is attributeless (17). Therefore we have with respect

1 Siddhantalesha, JivAnutvavich4ra.

xl BRAHMA-SUTRAS

to Brahman comparisons like the images of the sun. The forms are mere reflections, they are not real (18).

Ramanuja and Nimbarka on the other hand see quite a different subject discussed in these Sutras. The topic is not whether Brahman is attributeless or possesses attributes, but whether It is polluted by imperfections owing to Its being inside everything as the Inner Ruler, even as the soul being embodied is subject to imperfections due to its states of waking, dream, and dreamless sleep described in Sutras 1-10. Therefore according to Ramanuja the Sutras mean that even on account of place such as matter and soul there is not the possibility of the Supreme Lord being contaminated by imperfections, since every- where in the scriptures Brahman is described as having a twofold characteristic, viz. freedom from imperfec- tions and possessing all blessed qualities (11). If it be said that since the soul also by nature possesses according to Chh. 8.7 the twofold characteristic of Brahman and yet is subject to imperfections due to its connection with a body, the Inner Ruler will likewise be subject to such conditions owing to its connection with bodies, we deny it, for the Sruti at every place denies it by saying that Brahman is immortal and therefore free from imperfections (vide Brih. 3. 7. 3—22). The imperfections in the soul are due to Karma and the Lord who is not subject to it is therefore free from such imperfections (12). Brahman can be said to have no form, as It is the originator of name and form and therefore is not

INTRODUCTION xii

subject tc ixarma like the souls which being e.nbodied are subject to it (14). To an objection that the differentiated form of Brahman is false, Sutra 15 answers thus: Even as on account of texts like, “Brahman is Existence, Knowledge, Infinite’? we have to acccpt that intelligence constitutes the essential nature of Brahman, so also we have to admit that It possesses a twofold characteristic, as other- wise such texts become meaningless (15). And the texts say that much only, t.e. that Brahman has in- telligence for its essential nature, and does not nega- tive the other attributes of Brahman (16). The Sruti and Smriti state thus (17). For this very reason are comparisons such as reflected images of the sun. Brahman, although abiding in manifold places, ever possesses the twofold characteristic and is not con- taminated even as the sun reflected in dirty water 1s not polluted (18).

Nimbarka also more or less follows Ramanuja’s interpretation as regards Sutras 11-14. Sutras 15 and 16 he interprets in a different way, and sees in them an argument for establishing the authority of the Sruti as absolute in the matter discussed in 11-14. Sutras 17-21 he interprets like Ramanuja, though he reads 21 as a separate Sutra and not as a part of 20 as Ramanuja does.

A glance through these three commentaries on these Sutras convinces one of the superiority and reasonableness and also of the logical consistency of Sankara’s interpretation. Moreover, it has the merit

xliy BRAHMA-SUTRAS

of dealing with the solution of an important doubt. that arises in the mind of even a casual reader of the Upanishads, viz. as to the nature of Brahman— whether it is qualified or non-qualified; for the Sruti texts seem to support both views though they are contradictory. Raméanuja and Nimbarka ignore such an important subject and see a less important subject discussed in these Sutras. Secondly, they fail to bring out the force of the words of the Sutras in bold relief as Sankara does, e.g. ‘twofold characteristic’ of Sutra 11 which refers to contradictory qualities in Sankara, but not so in the other two. They therefore seem to overlook what is actually taught in the Sutras and bring in a subject-matter not meant by the aphorist. We shall be doing an injustice to Badarayana to think with Ramanuja and Nimbarka that he had omitted to discuss such an important subject in his work meant to systematize the teachings of the Upanishads. No doubt Ramanuja broaches this subject in Sutras 15 and 16 and says that both these views are to be accepted; but his interpretation of Sutra 16 is indeed stretched and cannot be accepted, while Nimbarka does not discuss the subject at all. We cannot think with Ramanuja that Badardyana disposed of such an important subject in one or two Sutras in a topic which deals with quite a different subject-matter and of less importance. RamAanuja’s introducing this subject in Sutras 15 and 16 is against the spirit of the Adhikarana (topic) even according to his own inter- pretation. It is something which he forcibly intro-

INTRODUCTION xiii

duces out of all relation to the context, as anybody can easily see.

In fact according to their interpretation of this Adhikarana the whole of it looks redundant after what has been stated by them in 2. 1. 18. Finally the simile of the reflections of the sun is happier accord- ing to Sankara’s interpretation than according to that of the other two and the text cited by RAmanuja in Sutra 18 holds good according to Sankara’s view also and more aptly.

Sutras 22-80 Sankara takes as a separate topic and interprets 22 to 24 as follows: What has been mentioned up to this (i.e. the two forms of Brahman mentioned in Brih. 2. 8. 1) is denied by the words “Not this, not this’? (Brih. 2. 8. 6) and the Sruti says something more than that afterwards. It does not deny Brahman but Its forms mentioned earlier, their transcendental reality (22). The objection that Brahman is denied because It is not experienced is not reasonable, for the Sruti says that Brahman exists, though It is not manifest on account of ignor- ance (23). And moreover It is realized in perfect meditation, so say the Sruti and Smriti (24). There- fore the Jiva becomes one with the Infinite when Knowledge dawns, for thus the scripture indicates (26). In the next two Sutras an objection is raised against Sutras 25 and 26. But on acount of both difference and non-difference being taught by the Sruti, the, relation between them is as between the serpent and its coil (27), or like that between light

xliv BRAHMA-SUTRAS

and its orb (28). Sutra 29 refutes this view and says: Or the relation is as given before in Sutras 25-26. And on account of the denial of everything else besides Brahman by the Sruti texts (80). Ramanuja continues the previous topic up to 26. Sutras 22-26 according to him mean: The text (Brih. 2. 3. 6) denies the previously mentioned that- muchness and says more than that. The two forms of Brahman (Brih. 2. 8. 1) do not exhaust Its attri- butes, for the text states further qualities after that.

For there is nothing higher than this ‘not this’.

Then comes the name, ‘the Truth of truth’; for the Pranas are true and It is the truth of them.”’ ‘Pranas’ here mean the souls, because they accompany the latter at death. The souls are true, because they do not undergo any change in their essential nature. The Lord is the Truth of these true souls, for these contract and expand with respect to intelligence, while He is unaffected. Thus the subsequent part of the text connects Brahman with some qualities. The clause ‘‘Not this, not this’’ does not deny the attributes of Brahman, but denies that Its nature is confined to these two forms only (22). The Sruti instruction is not unnecessary here, for though the world is seen, yet it is not known as a Prakara or mode of Brahman and that is what can be gathered only from the Sruti texts. So declares the Sruti (23). And Brahman’s being differentiated by these two forms is realized even as Its being of the nature of intelligence is realized by repeated meditation (25). For all these

INTRODUCTION xlv

reasons Brahman is regarded as Infinite. i.e. as possessing infinite attributes; for thus the attributes hold good, i.¢. the twofold characteristic of Sutra 22 (26). Sutras 27-80 are treated by Ramanuja as a separate topic. Sutras 27 and 28 give the Purva- paksha, as Sankara also says, and 29 gives the Siddhanta; but the words ‘as before’ in the Sutra refer not to Sutras 25 and 26, but to 2. 3. 43.

Nimbarka follows R&amanuja in Sutras 22-24. The next two Sutras he interprets somewhat different- ly. Just as fire is manifested through the rubbing of wooden sticks, so is Brahman manifested in medita- tion (25). On realizing Brahman the soul becomes one with It (26). Sutras 27 and 28 he takes as the author’s and not as the opponent’s view. Sutra 27 describes that the relation between Brahman and the insentient world is as between the serpent and _ its coils (27) and the relation between the soul and Brahman is as between the orb and the light (28). But to an objection of the kind raised in Sutra 2.1.25: the answer is as before, t.e. 2. 1. 26 (29). Morcover, the Supreme Self is not affected by the imperfection of the soul (30).

Sankara thus interprets ‘Not this, not this’? as a denial of the two forms of Brahman mentioned in Brih. 2. 8. 1. Brahman can be described only as ‘‘Not this, not this,’”’? i.e. It is not what we see. Whatever we see is not Brahman as It is. Brahman 1S something different from all this manifested world. This interpretation is in keeping with scriptural

xlvi BRAHMA-SUTRAS

teaching. Raémanuja and Nimbarka interpret that ‘Not this, not this’? denies only the limitation of Brahman’s nature to only these two forms, in other words It has many more attributes than these two. The two forms are real and are only two of the infinite attributes of the Lord. This seems to be a total denial of the Upanishadic teaching. ‘‘Not this, not this’? occurs in four different places in the Brih. Up. Even if Ramanuja’s explanation be allowed in Brih. 2. 8. 6—however strange and twisted it might any means yield to such an- interpretation. These texts after saying, ‘‘This Self is that which has been described as ‘Not this, not this,’ ”? says, ‘‘It is imperceptible’? etc. Other texts also describe the Self or Brahman as beyond comprehension. ‘‘There goes neither the eye, nor speech nor the mind; we know It not nor do we see how to teach about It. Different It is from all that is known, and is beyond the unknown as well’’ (Kena 1. 3-4); ‘“Whence speech returns along with the mind without realizing It’’ (Taitt. 2. 4); also Ibid 2. 9 and Katha 1. 38. 15. From these texts we find that nothing can be predicated of Brahman. From the Kena texts we find that we cannot say that Brahman is this and this in a positive way. It is not what we see and therefore It can only be described as ‘‘Not this, not this’? by denying everything we see in It. It is true that we do find the scriptures dealing with both difference and non-difference; but with what object,

_ INTRODUCTION xlvii

is the question. it is not to establish that both are true, for they arc mutually contradictory. A careful study of the scriptures convinces one that duality is taught in order to take the aspirant step by step through it to non-duality. Ramanuja in his Bhashya on these Sutras criticizes Sankara saying that the Sruti could not have described these two forms only to deny them later on. But that this is a process the Sruti adopts is clear from Prajapati’s instruction to Indra in the Chhandogya or Varuna’s teaching to Bhrigu in the Taittiriva Upanishad. The aspirant is gradually taken to higher and higher truths. Through duality he is led up to non-duality, the goal or final truth. Duality has not been praised anywhere in the scriptures, and no fruit is ascribed to it. On the other hand it is censured (vide Katha 2. 4. 10-11; Brih. 4. 4. 19; Mait. 4. 2. and 6. 8), which shows that the scriptures do not intend to posit duality. But non- duality is praised and immortality is said to be achieved by the knowledge of unity. According to the Purva Mimamsa principle, that which has no result of its own but is mentioned in connection with something else which has a result, is subordinate to the latter. Therefore duality which has no fruit of its own is subsidiary to non-cuality which is the main purport of the Sruti texts. Again we have texts like, “The Atman is smaller than the smallest, greater than the greatest’? (Katha 1]. 2. 20); ‘“‘Neither gross nor fine’? etc.—which negate all duality and establish the Infinity of Brahman beyond all doubts.

xlvili BRAHMA-SUTRAS

A question, however, may arise: If everything is negated, what will be left? We shall by such a process arrive at a nonentity. Not so. We cannot go on negating ad infinitum, but have to come finally to some basic reality, and this basic reality behind everything is the Atman or Brahman. When we remove an object, space is left behind. Similarly, when everything we see is removed or negated, Brahman is left behind, which cannot be negated and which is the witness of everything. We cannot say that by negation we come to nonentity, for the very fact that we comprehend this nonentity shows that it is being illumined by the witnessing consciousness, the basic reality even behind this idea of nonentity. In this Sutra the Sutrakara solves this doubt, showing that the negation concerns not Brahman, but only the two forms of It. To turn the drift of this discus- sion topsy turvy and establish the reality of the two forms is to ignore the spirit of scriptural teaching.

Mdydavdda in the Upanishads:

There is a common belief that Mayavada is not found in the scriptures and that it is Sankara’s own doctrine borrowed from the Buddhists. But such a statement is scarcely justified. In the Brihadaranyaka text under discussion we have, ‘‘Now its name: ‘The Truth of truth.’ The vital force is truth, and It is the Truth of that’? (Brih, 2. 3. 6). If the vital force, 1.€. Prajna (the soul in a state of deep sleep) of which the vital force is an Upadhi is true or real, Brahman

INTRODUCTION xlix

is the Truth or Reality of this real. In othcr words, Brahman’s reality is of a different grade from that of the universe. If this world is real and not Maya, as Sankara would call it, then Brahman is the Reality of this real, which shows that the world’s reality is of an inferior kind from that of Brahman and when It is realized this world is no more. A similar idea is conveyed by Chh. 7. 24. 1 where Brahman, the Infinite, is said to be immortal and the werld, the finite, is said to be mortal. But this is exactly what Sankara too says—that the two, Brahman and the world, have two grades of reality, even as the dream world and the world we experience while we are awake have two grades of reality, and as a result we are justified in saying that the dream world is Maya, as the Sutrakaraé says in 38. 2. 8, or unreal as compared with the waking state. Similarly, this world we experience 1s Maya or unreal as compared with the reality of Brahman. The dream world has a reality for the time being; so has this world so long as we are in ignorance; and Sankara nowhere denies the Vyavaharika (phenomenal) reality of this world. The scriptures explain this difference between the reality of the two, Brahman and the world, by using symbology, as for example in Chh. 6. 1. 4, whick we had occasion to explain in Sutra 2. 1. 14 where the Sruti tries to explain that the one, the clay, is more real than the many, which it identifies with name and form only., We find the same idea again in Brih. 1. 6. 8: “This immortal entity is covered by truth (the

! BRAHMA-SUTRAS

five elements): The vital force is the immortal entity, and name and form are truth; (so) this vital force is covered by them.’’ Name and form, 7.e. the world we experience, are called truth, but Brahman is distinguished from them by saying that It is immortal —Its reality is of a different grade from the reality of that which is called truth. And as the reality of this world is of a lesser grade or illusory as compared with that of Brahman, It can be the cause of such an illusory world of manifoldness without undergoing any change in Itself; for an illusory manifoldness can exist in It without in any way affecting Its immutabil- ity, like a snake in a rope or the manifold dream world in the dreaming self, as the Sutrakara exempli- fies in 2. 1. 28, which brings us to the conclusion that this world is a Vivarta of the non-dual Brahman, as Sankara says.

Coming to the interpretation of Sutras 27-30, Sankara connects ‘‘or as before’? in Sutra 29 with what immediately precedes in Sutras 25-26 and so it is happy. RaémAnuja connects it with Sutra 2. 3. 43 and so it is not so apt. Nimbarka’s explanation is still far-fetched; for while Ramaénuja refers for the Siddhanta only to a previous Sutra, Nimbarka refers for an objection as well as a decision to Sutras in 2.1. His interpretation of the whole topic thus appears to be much stretched.

That Sankara has followed the Sutrakara faith- fully in his interpretation of Sutras 11-80 will be clearer if we just try to see the reason why the latter

INTRODUCTION li

treats of dream and deep sleep in this section which dezls with the nature of Brahman. Sankara at the beginning of Chapter III, Section 1, says that the transmigration of the soul is taught in order to generate a spirit of Vairdgya (dispassion).

Sutras 1-10 of Section? treat of the soul’s states of dream and dreamless sleep. According to Sankara the very fact that the dream world does not fulfil the conditions of the time and space factors as in the waking state, shows that the dream world is illusory and therefore a creation of the soul and not of the Lord. From this he shows that the rea! nature of the Jiva is self-luminous and beyond all these states. Thus Sutras 1-10 elucidate the real nature of the ‘You’ in “You art That.’? Sutras 11-21 give the nature of ‘That’ and Sutras 22-80 identify the two. Thus the place of Sutras 1-10 in this section is very significant. Ramanuja and Nimbarka say that the creation of the dream world belongs to the Lord and not to the soul. If it were so, it should be as real as this world. Granting that it is the Lord’s creation, of what significance is this subject in a section that deals with the nature of Brahman? It would have been apt in 2.8 where creation is taught. If it be to create a spirit of Vairdgya, as Ramanuja says at the beginning of Chapter ITI, then it ought to have been included in Section 1 which treats of the soul’s transmigration with the same object, and thus be separated from Section 2 where it is out of place.

hii BRAHMA-SUTRAS

The above analysis of Sutras 8. 2. 1-80 shows that Sankara has rightly grasped the spirit of Badarayana, while Ramanuja and Nimbarka have sadly missed it.

A twofold knowledge of Brahman established:

Finally, let us consider Sutras 4. 2. 12-14 and Sutras 4.4.1-7. The former set of Sutras as they stand are interpreted better by Ramanuja and Nimbarka than by Sankara. According to Sankara they run as follows: If it be said (that the Pranas of a knower of Brahman do not depart), on account of the Sruti denying it (we say) not so, for the Sruti (Madhyandina recension of the text) denies the departure of the Pranas from the soul and not from the body (12). For the denial is clear in the texts of some schools (13). So in Sutra 12 the Siddhanta view is first expressed on the basis of Brih. 4. 4. 6, Kanva recension, and the objection against this is raised by the opponent in the second half of the Sutra, basing his argument on the Madhyandina recension of the text, which is answered again in Sutra 18 by Brih. 3. 2. 11, Kanva recension. By such an interpretation the significance of ‘some schools’ is lost, for it ought to have referred to some text of the Madhyandina school and not of the same Kanva school on which the Siddhanta is based in Sutra 12.

Ramanuja and Nimbarka on the other hand read these Sutras as one, which runs as follows: ‘‘If it be said that the Pranas of a knower of Brahman do not depart on account of the denial by the Sruti text

INTRODUCTION liti

(Brih. 4. 4. 6, Kanva), we deny it; for the Sruti says that they do net depart from the soul (i.e. they accompany the soul) and.:sis is clear according to some, viz. the Madhyandina recension of Brih. 4.4. 6.’? We cannot but say that this is more happy, as the force of ‘some school’ and the word ‘hi’

(because) in the Sutra are well brought cut.

Though the interpretation according to the letter of the Sutra forces us to side with Ramanuja and Nimbarka, yet if we consider the Sruti text, viz. Brih. 4. 4. 6, on which the discussion is based and also the arrangement of the Sutras in this Section 2 up to Sutra 16, we find that Sankara is more reasonable than the other two and it looks as though the Sutra- kara himself had made a slip, though he meant other- wise. Brih. 4. 4. 6 says in the first half of the text how one who is attached transmigrates, and concludes the first half by saying, ‘Thus does the man who desires transmigrate.’’ The second half speaks of the man without desires and says, ‘‘Of him who is with- out desires... and to whom al! objects of desire are but the Self—the organs do not depart. Being but Brahman, he is merged in Brahman.’’ Here it is quite clear that the Sruti contrasts the two cases of one who is attached and one who is not attached and so does not transmigrate but is merged in Brahman. Now it is well known both from the scriptures and the Vedanta-Sutras itself that a transmigrating soul at the time of death goes out with the organs, and so when in contrast to this it is said, ‘‘His organs do not

liv BRAHMA-SUTRAS

depart,’’ it is quite clear that the denial of departure of the Pranas is from, the body as in the case of one who is attached, ana onsequently the expression ‘from him’ in the Maédhyandina recension even ought to mean the body and not the soul.

From what has been stated above we find Sankara more reasonable and consistent and therefore we can safely say that his interpretation of Sutras 12-14 as establishing a twofold knowledge is after Badara- yana’s view, though according to the wording of the Sutras it is not so happy. This sort of inter- pretation of the Sutrakaras is not without its precedent, as we find Upavarsha and Sabara doing the same in their commentaries on the Purva Mimamsa-Sutras.

We now come to the last section of the work where the state of the released soul is described. Sutras 1-3 describe that on the attainment of Know- ledge the soul manifests itself in its own nature. Sutra 4 says that it attains non-distinction with Brahman. The question as to what the nature of that state is naturally arises after this and Sutras 5-7 attempt a description. The views of Jaimini and Audulomi are given and finally in Sutra 7 Badarayana says that both these views are true, for they are not contradictory. The question is, whether the views of Jaimini and Audulomi are true of the released soul in succession or simultaneously. Bada- rayana’s decision is that they are true at one and the same time according as the subject is viewed

| INTRODUCTION lv

from the relative or transcendental standpoint.. Sankara makes this ciear ir’ his Bhashya. His critics find fault with bim here. They say that he is obliged in this Sutra to ascribe to the truly released soul qualities whieh clearly cannot belong to it, since for such a soul no Vyavakara exists. They say thereby that his interpretation is not faithful. Such a criticism shows that they have failed to understand what Sankara means here. He does not say that the released soul is conscious of itself as possessing all the qualities described by Jaimini, but that we who are in bondage are obliged in describing the state of such a soul to nave recourse to such a description. In reality the soul when released exists as Pure Intelligence, but as Pure Intelligence is beyond our conception, we in our ignorance view it as identified with Iswara, for that is the highest reading of Pure Intelligence or the Nirguna Brahman that we can possibly conceive. Certainly there exists no Vyava- hara at all for the released soul, which is free from ignorance; but it exists for us who are in ignorance and Jaimini’s description of the state of a released soul is our description of it. Iswara’s possession of powers is not like that of an ordinary Jiva which being  subject to Nescience thinks of itself as an experiencer, an agent, and so on. He is beyond all taint and therefore not subject to Nescience, and consequently does not think of Himself as possessing all these lordly powers; but these powers exist in Him, because we in our ignorance ascribe them

1vi BRAHMA-SUTRAS

.to Him. Even so are these lordly powers ascribed to the released soul by us and it is regarded as identical: or having attained non-distinction with Iswara. This is the full import of Sutra 7 both according to Badarayana and Sankara. So till all souls are released, the state of the released partakes ‘of a twofold characteristic according to the view- point from which it is described—transcendental or relative, even as Brahman has a twofold characteristic of which one is illusory or read from the relative standpoint (vide 8. 2. 11-21). This attainment of Jordly powers by souls on identification with Iswara is not the same as the attainment of such powers by the knowers of the Saguna Brahman who go to Brahmaloka, for it is made clear in 4. 4. 17 that their lordly powers do not include the power of creation etc., but only power to create objects of enjJoyments at will (4. 4. 8), while this power is not negated in the case of souls which get identified with Iswara accord- ing to Sutra 4. 4. 5 and 7.

That the Sutrakara makes a distinction between the attainment of Liberation by the knowledge of the Nirguna Brahman and that by the knowledge of the Saguna Brahman, is clear from Sutra 4. 1. 19, where he makes no reference to any going forth in the case of a Jivanmukta, but simply says that on the exhaus- tion of the Prarabdha Karma he attains Brahman and this is also in keeping with texts like Brih. 4. 4. 6 and especially Chh. 6. 14. 2 where it is clearly stated that his merging in Brahman is delayed just as

INTRODUCTION lvii

long as the body lasts. But going to Brahmaloka by “‘the path of tne gods”’ is also a kind of Liberation, for from there the soul does not return to this mortal world, but gets merged in Brahman at the end of the cycle together with Brahma, as stated in Sutra 4, 8.10. As the author is concerned in this section, with the result of Upasanas, viz. Libcration, he describes the result of the knowledge of the Nirgune Brahman in Sutras 1-7 and from 8-22 the sesult of the knowledge of the Saguna Brahman. If, as accord- ing ‘to Ramanuja and Nimbarka, there is no such distinction at all, but the description is of one kind of Liberation only, then when it is said in Sutra 4. 4. 5 that the released soul attains a nature like that of Brahman, there is no further necessity of saying that it can create at will all objects of enjoy- ment. Moreover, if being free from sin, old age etc. (Chh. 8. 1. 5) are qualities of the soul as well as of the Lord, then they will cease to be the defining characteristic of the Lord. In this case the objection raised in the first part of Sutra 1. 8. 19 will not be answered by the second half of the Sutra. The Sutra runs as follows: ‘‘If it be said that from the sub- sequent texts which refer to the Jiva ‘small Akésa’ means the Jiva, we say that the reference to the soul is in so far as its real nature is made manifest (2.e. as non-different from Brahman).’’ In the previous Sutra it was established that the ‘small Ak4sa’ in Chh. 8. 1. 1 is Brahman and not the Jiva, in spite of the reference to the Jiva in Chh. 8. 8. 4, for ‘free

Iviii BRAHMA-SUTRAS

from evil’ etc. which are said to be qualities of the ‘small Akasa’ are not true of the soul. At the end of his commentary on Sutra 18, Sankara says that Sutra 20 will make it clear why the individual soul is referred to in Chh. 8. 8. 4. In Sutra 19 cited above a fresh objection is raised that subsequent texts also refer to the Jiva (vide Chh. 8. 7-11 in which the waking, dream, and deep sleep state of the soul are described) and therefore ‘small Akasa’ means Jiva. The second half answers it by saying that the reference to the Jiva is in so far as its real nature is made manifest (vide Chh. 8. 12. 8). The reference to the individual soul in Chh. 8. 3. 4 is to show that in reality it is beyond the three states of waking, dream, and deep sleep and non-different from Brahman. If under the circumstances ‘free from sin’ etc. are its qualities even as different from Brahman, as Ramanuja says, then ‘small Akasa’ cannot be established to be Brahman against the objection raised in Sutra 1. 8. 19. Moreover, in Sutra 1. 8. 20 (according to him 19) the explanation given by him for the reference to the Jiva in Chh. 8. 3. 4 is not at all satisfactory. He says, ‘‘This reference to the Jiva serves the purpose of giving instruction not about the Jiva, but about the nature of that which is the cause of the qualities of the individual soul, i.€. qualities specially belonging to the Lord. The reason is that such information about the released soul helps the doctrine with respect to ‘small Akasa’. The individual soul which wants to attain Brahman

_ INTRODUCTION lix

must also know its true nature, so that it as being endowed with auspicious qualities will finally arrive at the intuition of the Lord who is a mass of auspi- cious qualities raised io the highest excellence.”? But according to Sankara we have seen that its reference is to identify the twc—the released soul and the Lord. It is quite apparent that between the two explanations Ramanuja’s falls to the ground. Such an argument does not at all fit in as an explanation for the reference to the released soul in Chh. 8. 3. 4 and is against the spirit of the teaching of the whole of chapter 8 of the Chhandogya. Sankara’s critics find fault with him taking into consideration only Sutra 1. 3. 19; but if they only try to understand the Sutrakara taking into corsideration Sutras 18-20 and the Sruti texts to which they refer, they will find that Sankara’s interpretation is by far the best.

The defects that are shown in Ramanuja’s inter- pretation of Section 4 hold good in the case of Nimbarka also.

Sankara’s interpretation justified by the Gitd:

Thus a comparative study of these three com- mentaries on the most important topics treated by Badarayana in his work establishes a strong case for Sankara’s interpretation of the Sutras. We find similar views also expressed in the Gita. And if, as has been shown at the beginning, the author of the Gita had a hand in the Sutras—and this fact is not questioned by Ramanuja and Nimbarka, for

Ix BRAHMA-SUTRAS

according to them it is the same person Veda Vyasa— then it goes all the more to show that Sankara’s interpretation is correct, for we cannot expect that the same author has expressed different views in the two works. We shall cite a few texts from the Gita which tally with Sankara’s interpretation of th Sutras.

T shall describe that which has to be known,

.. the beginningless Supreme Brahman. It is called neither.-being nor non-being,... Without and within all beings... Impartible, yet It exists as if divided in beings’’ (13.12-16)—these texts describe the attributelessness of Brahman. The text says that the one Immutable appears us if divided into many and not in reality. It Itself, therefore, is ‘‘the sustainer, generator, and devourer of all beings’’ (13. 16); also 7. 6 and 7. That Brahman has a two- fold nature, the Nirguna which is Its real nature and the Saguna which is the creation of Maya, is made clear by Arjuna’s question in 12. 1 and the Lord’s answer in 12. 2-5,’ where He recognizes the Nirguna aspect, but says at the same time that those devoted to the Saguna aspect are better versed in Yoga, as devotion to it is easier and therefore best suited to Arjuna and the generality of mankind, even as He says in 5. 6 for the same reason that Karma Yoga 1s better than Jnana Yoga. The individual soul in its real nature is described in 2. 11-25. Specially verses 16-18 say that it is real, all-pervading, changeless, immutable,

INTRODUCTION Ixi

indestructible and illimitable, while verse 24 again says it is all-pervading. Again 6. 31 establishes the identity of the self and Brahman contained in the Vedic dictum, ““fhat you art,’’ verses 29 and 80 having described the rea] nature of ‘you’ and ‘That’; while 18. 29-84 describe the real nature of the soul as identical with Brahman. But the soul in its state of bondage being deluded considers itself an agent and experiencer, atomic and a part of the Lord. ‘The Gunas of Prakriti perform all action. With the understanding deluded by egoism, man thinks, ‘I am the doer’ ”’ (3. 27). See also 14. 28

The doctrine of Maya is clearly referred to in the following texts: ‘‘Knowledge is enveloped in ignorance, hence do beings get deluded’? (5. 15); ‘This world knows Me not, being deluded by the modifications of the Gunas. Verily this divine Maya of Mine is difficult to cross over... deprived of dis- crimination by Maya they follow the Asuric ways’’ (7. 18-16); ‘I am not manifest to all, being veiled by My Yogamaya”’ (7. 25); ‘‘The Lord dwells in the heart of all beings causing them to revolve by His Maya’’ (18. 61). Finally, though stress is laid on Bhakti in the Gita, nowhere does it say that Bhakti is superior to Knowledge. On the other hand we find Knowledge highly praised. ‘‘The fire of Knowledge burns all Karma to ashes. There exists nothing so purifying like Knowledge’? (4. 87-38);

Lxii BRAHMA-SUTRAS

‘‘Supremely dear is the wise man to Me. I regard him as My very Self’ (7. 17-18).

Conclusion:

In conclusion, we would like to state that from what all has been said above we do not mean to suggest that Sankara’s interpretation of the Sutras is the only true one. Rather our object has been to show that Sankara too, like the other great com- mentators, is justified in interpreting the Sutras in the way he has done. The fact is, Badardyana has systematized the philosophy of the Upanishads in his work, and like them his Sutras also are all-com- prehensive. The Upanishads, we must remember, do not teach throughout any particular doctrine. They contain various doctrines which are meant for people at different stages of spiritual evolution. They are not contradictory, but rather they are based on the principle of Adhikaribheda, as all are not capable of apprehending the same truth. The old idea of Arundhati-darasana-nyaya’ applies. Nearly every chapter in the Upanishad begins with dualistic teach- ing or Upasanad and ends with a grand flourish of Advaita. God is first taught as a Being who is the creator of this universe, its preserver, and the de- struction to which everything goes at last. He is the one to be worshipped, the Ruler, and appears to be outside of nature. Next we find the same teacher

' The method of spotting the tiny star Arundhati with the help of bigger stars near it, calling them Arundhati.

INTRODUCTION Ixil

teaching that God is not outside of nature, but imma- nent in nature And at last both ideas are discarded and it is taught that whatever is real is He; there 1s no difference. ‘‘Svetaketu, you art That.’? The immanent one is at last declared to be the same that is in the human soul.! Tunis fact is recognized by Badarayana too and so commentators make a mistake when they think that the Sutras propound only their doctrine and nothing else.

This grand principle uf Adhikaribheda is the foundation on which the teachings of the Upanishads, the Brahma-Sutras, and the Gita are based and that is the reason why they have been universally accepted by the Hindus of all classes and denominations. From this point of view we are inclined to think that of all the commentators Sankara has done the greatest justice to the Sutrakaéra by his twofold doctrine of the absolute and phenomenal reality.

1 Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda, Vol. III.

ADHYAS4 OR SUPERIMPOSITION

The whole of Sankara’s philosophy may be summed up as follows: aw ea Hafner Nal Aa TIT | — The Brahman of the Uparishads 1s the only Reality, and everything else--this world of manifoldness—is unreal, is a mere appearance; the individual soul (Jiva) is identical with Brahman, the One without a second, which the scriptures define as Existence- Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. ‘‘Brahman is Existence, Knowledge, Infinity’? (Taitt. 2.1); ‘Brahman is Knowledge, Bliss’? (Brih. 8.9.28). This identity of the Jiva and Brahman is clearly stated by the scrip- tures in texts like: ‘You art That, O Svetaketu’”’ (Chh. 6.8.7), ‘I am Brahman”? (Brih. 1-4-10), and ““The Self alone is to be meditated upon” (Brih.

The question then naturally arises: If Truth is one, whence arises this many which we experience through the senses? Truth cannot contradict experience. So Sankara had to explain this apparent contradiction between Truth and our. everyday experience. He says that this plurality is an illusion (Maya). It has no reality, for it disappears whea the knowledge of the true nature of Brahman is realized. It is just like seeing a snake in a rope in the dark. This wrong perception is brought about by ignorance (Avidya), which is beginningless. It is this ignorance which is the cause of all this duality,

Brahman being mistaken for the world. On account of this ignorance the individual soul identifies itself with its adjuncts (Upadhis) viz. the body, senses, etc., which are only superimposed on it. This identification makes the soul think that it is the doer, enjoyer, etc.—though the truth is that it is none of these—and thereby it comes under the sway of birth, death, happiness, misery, etc., in short, becomes bound down to this world (Samsara).

When Sankara says that the world is false, he does not mean that it is absolutely nothing, but that our experience is liable to be stultified by means of knowledge of things as they are. The world has a relative existence; it is true for the time being, but disappears when true knowledge dawns. It is not real for all times, in other words, it is not real from the absolute standpoint. Maya or ignorance is not a real entity. We can neither say that it exists nor that it does not exist. It is a mystery which is beyond our understanding; it is unspeakable (Anir- vachaniya). As Mayé is not real, it cannot be related to Brahman, the Reality, in any way whatsoever; for any relation between truth and falsehood is impossible. The relation is only apparent, and there- fore Brahman is in no way affected by this illusion which is superimposed upon It, even as the rope is. not affected by the snake that is assumed to exist in it.

Therefore the only way to liberation from this worldly existence (Samsara) is to get rid of this:

Adhyasa] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 5

wrong notion trough the real knowledge of Brahman. Just as in the case of the rope and the snake, it is the knowledge of ihe rope alone that removes the illusion of the snake and nothing else, so also it is the knowledge of Brahman alone that brings about the cessation of this relative existence (Samsara).

A man who knows It alone truly, passes beyond

death; there is nu o'her path to go by’”’ (Svet. 3.8);

He comes not to death who sees that One.’’

Pilcrimages, austerities, worship and charity—these by themselves, without Knowledge, cannot help us to attain Liberation. Their utility lies only in purifying our mind (Chittastiddhi), cleansing it of all worldliness, and thus making it fit to comprehend the Truth. When Brahman is realized this phenom- enal world disappears automatically, without any further effort on the part of the individual. Knowledge of Brahman being thus the only way to Liberation, an inquiry into Brahman through the study of the Brahma-Sutras is absolutely necessary.

Sankara’s explanation of the world as an illusion has given his philosophy the name of Mayavada or Anirvachaniya Khyativada. It is also known as Vivartavada, the doctrine of the apparent modifica- tion of Brahman into this phenomenal world, as opposed to Parindmavada or the doctrine of the actual modification of Brahman into this phenomenal world, as held by some other schools of Vedanta like the Visislhtadvaitavada of Ramanuja.

Sankara anticipated that this method of explain-

ing the phenomenal world would raise a protest from the various other schools of his time. So at the beginning of his commentary on the Brahma-Sutras, he writes a masterly introduction, which is well known as the Adhyasa Bhashya or the section dealing with superimposition, wherein he establishes super- imposition as a statement of fact and not a mere hypothesis. He starts with the objections that can possibly be raised against his theory of super- imposition and then refutes them. He says: It is well known that the subject and the object, which have for their spheres or contents the notions of ‘I’? and ‘You’ respectively, and which are opposed to each other as darkness and light, cannot be identified. Hence their attributes also cannot be identified. Consequently the superimposition of the object and its attributes on the subject, whose essence is pure intelligence, and vice versa, ought to be a logical impossibility.

If the world phenomena are a case: of super- imposition, like the snake in the rope, then which is superimposed on which? Is the world super- imposed on Brahman, or is it the reverse? In the latter case, the world, which is the substratum, like the rope in the example, would be a reality. If it is the other way—the world on Brahman—it is not possible, for Brahman is not an object which can be perceived by the senses like the rope. A _ thing becomes an object when it is limited by time, space, and causation. Since Brahman is unlimited, It is

Adhyasa] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 7

beyoud these, and so cannot be an object of per- ception; as such It cannot be the substratum of a. superimposition. Brahman is also the inner Self of everyone and therefore can never be separate and in front of a person like a rope, when alone the world can be surimposed on It.

Neither can Brahman be both subject and object of the thinking process, for one and the same being cannot both be the agent and the object of its activity at the same time. An object is that on which is concentrated the activity of the agent, and hence it must be different from the agent. If, again, Brahman is manifested by some other knowledge and thus becomes an object, It ceases to be self-luminous and becomes limited, and this the scriptures do not accept. Further, in all cases of superimposition there is an antecedent real knowledge of the object which is superimposed, as of the snake in the example. So to superimpose the world on Brahman a real knowl- edge of the world is necessary, and this would make the world a reality, with the result that the cessation of the world phenomena would be an impossibility and Liberation would be impossible. Thus in what- ever way we may try to establish the theory of superimposition, we are not able to do so.

Yet, says Sankara, it is natural (a self-evident fact) on the part of man, because of ignorance, not to distinguish between the two entities (the subject and the vbject), which are quite contradictory, and to superimpose the one on the other, and their

attributes as well, and thus mixing up the real and the unreal to use such phrases as ““That is 1’’, or

This is mine’’. The Self again is not altogether a

non-object, for it is the object of the notion of the Ego. The Self does not entirely elude our grasp. Though the inner Self is not an object and is also without parts, yet owing to ignorance, which is unspeakable and without a beginning, attributes like mind, body, senses, etc., which are products of ignorance, are superimposed on the Self, and _ it behaves as if it were an agent, enjoyer, possessed of parts, and many—although in truth it is none of these—and thus becomes an object. The real Self can never be an _ object of knowledge. Self- consciousness is possible only with respect to a Self already qualified by these adjuncts (Upadhis). This sounds like an argument in a circle; for to establish superimposition we have to accept the Self to be an object, and the Self can be an object only through the superimposition of adjuncts (Upadhis); it is actually not so. It is a case like the seed and the tree. The seed gives rise to the tree, which again produces the seed, the cause of the future tree, and so on. So in this series of illusions without a beginning, the Self, which is the substratum of the present superimposition, is an object on account of a past superimposition, and that one had for its substratum the Self, which had become an object of a still earlier superimposition, and so on ad infinitum. The pure Self without the limiting

Adhyasa] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 9

adjuncts is xucver the substratum of a_ super- imposition. It is the difference in the _ limiting adjuncts, as shown above, that makes it possible for the Self to be at the same time an agent and the object of action.

Superimposition, again, is due to ignorance and hence it is not necessary that the knowledge of the object superimposed must be a real knowledge. It is enough if we have a knowledge; it need not necessarily be real; it can itself be another illusory knowledge. That the Self exists is proved by the intuitive knowledge we have of it. This is well known and but for it nothing would have been cognized in this world. ‘‘He shining, everything else shines’? (Kath. 2.2.15). We know things in and through it; no consciousness or experience is possible independently of it. Everyone is conscious of his own Self. for no one thinks, “I am not’’. Nor, again, is 1t necessary that the object to be a substratum of a superimposition should be before us, for we see that Akasa (sky), which is not visible to the senses, becomes a substratum for superimpositions by the ignorant, who impute blueness, spherical shape, etc., to it in such expressions as, ‘“The sky is blue’’, and “It is spherical’. Thus superimposition is an established fact.

But then direct perception, which is the best of all proofs—since it is the basis of all other means of knowledge like inference etc.—affirms this world of manifoldness. How can the scriptures that deny it

carry conviction as against direct experience? They cannot. Hence scriptural texts that deny the many and uphold unity will have to be interpreted in a manner so as not to contradict our experience. This view cannot stand. For the scriptures (Srutis) are impersonal, eternal, self-luminous, and so on. Their validity is direct and self-evident and _ therefore infallible. They constitute by themselves an inde- ‘pendent source of knowledge. Hence they too are to be accepted as authoritative. The fact is that each evidence of knowledge has its own sphere wherein it is absolutely authoritative. Perception has its supreme validity in knowledge through the senses. There a hundred texts cannot prevail against it. The scriptures (Srutis) on the other hand have their absolute authority in a province where per- ception cannot be of any avail. Their province is transcendental knowledge, which cannot be attained in any other way. Here revelation, which does not depend on other sources of knowledge, is the final authority, and not perception or even reason. The scriptures do not deny the empirical validity of perception; they deny only its absolute or transcen- dental validity.

SUPERIMPOSITION DEFINED

Superimposition, says Sankara, is the apparent presentation to consciousness, by way of remem- brance, of something previously observed in some other thing. It is an apparent presentation, that is

Adhyasa] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 11

knowledge which is subsequently falsified; in other words, it is illusory knowledge. According to Vachaspati Misra this is the fundamental character- istic of superimposition, and the rest of the definition only differentiates it from those given by other schools of philosophy. ut the author of the com- mentary Ratnaprabhd takes apparent presentation in some other thing as the characteristic mark of super- imposition, and this scems to be more in keeping with Sankara, who says in his commentary: ‘But all these definitions ayree in so far as they represent superimposition as the apparent presentation of the attributes of one thing in another thing.”’

As it is impossible to have illusory knowledge without the mixing up of two things, we find the words something previvusly observed in the definition. These words, together with the words apparent pre- sentation, make it clear that the thing superimposed is not the real object seen some time before, but something like it. A mere experience, and not the reality, is what is necessary; hence the word observed. The experience should not be a present one, but a past one, and that is the significance of the word previously. So the thing superimposed is a false or unreal thing. But the thing on which it is superimposed is a real thing. The words by way of remembrance excludes all cases of recognition where the object previously observed again presents itself to’ our senses, as when a person seen at a particular place is again seen at another place. In

12 | BRAHMA-SUTRAS [Adhyasa

remembrance the object previously observed is not in renewed contact with the senses. It is mere remembrance that operates in the case of super- Imposition.

This definition of superimposition meets an objection of the Mimamsakas, who say that an unreal thing cannot be an object of experience. According to them all knowledge is real; there can be nothing ‘like false knowledge. They uphold the intrinsic validity of all knowledge, for every knowledge produces a sense of certainty in us and we have no doubt about it at the time. If it were otherwise, then we should always be in doubt and never arrive at any certainty. So every knowledge is true for the time being, though subsequent experience may prove that it was wrong, as in the case of an illusion. But from the definition of superimposition given by Sankara we find that because a particular thing is experienced it does not for that very reason become real. A thing may’be unreal and at the same time may be experienced. Otherwise the water in a mirage would be a reality, which in fact we know it is not.

The Prabhakara school of Mimamsakas raise a fresh objection. How can the world be unreal or non-existent? Non-existence is not a category by itself; it can be conceived only in relation to a real object. We speak of non-existence when one real object is predicated in terms of another real object. When we think of a pot in terms of a cloth, we say

Adhyasa] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 18

the nez,ation. »f the cloth is the pot. That is all that ix meant by non-existence; apart from this, it has no reality. An unreal object can never be the object of our experience. So this world, if it were unreal, could never be the object of our experience.;

Applying this argument in the case of a mirage, we find that the rvality, the sun’s rays refracted by layers of air, is, according to the Mimamsakas, nothing but the negation of water, and it is therefore self-evident thut the phenomenon we _ exnverience cannot be water. Neither can they say that the water in the mirage:s not real, since it is experienced. So the water in the mirage is neither real nor unreal, nor can it be both at the same time. Therefore we have to accept the phenomenon as something beyond our comprehension (Anirvachaniya), which is exactly the view of Sankara.

Sankara says that the nature of objects is two- fold, real and unreal. The first manifests by its very nature, depending on the object itself; the second, the unreal appearance, depends on some other thing for its manifestation. In a mirage the rays of the sun are a reality, but their appearance as water is unreal and depends on something else, the impressions (Samskaras) produced by seeimg water elsewhere before. That which is real always continues to be so, but the unreal is ever changing. Brahman, the Reality, remains unchanged; but Maya and its nroducts, which are assumed to exist in Brahman, are unreal and therefore everchanging, yet

experienced by us. The world phenomena are neither real nor unreal, nor both; they are unspeakable (Anirvachaniya).

_ DEFINITION OF SUPERIMPOSITION ACCORDING TO OTHER SCHOOLS

The four schools of philosophy in Buddhism define superimposition as ‘‘the superimposition of the attributes of one thing on another’. They main- tain that in superimposition forms of cognition, or modes of the internal organ in the form of the object, are superimposed on an external object which itself may be real or illusory. The Prabhakaras refute this definition, for according to the Buddhists there is no separate entity called the Self apart from consciousness (Vijnina). The Self is but a form of consciousness. If in an illusion, where a rope 1s taken for a snake, the snake also be a form of cognition, then our experience ought to be of the kind, ‘I am a snake’’ or “‘My snake’’, and not as ‘‘This is a snake’’. Therefore Prabhakaras define superimposition as ‘an error arising from the non- perception of the difference of that which is super- imposed from that on which it is superimposed’’. There is no positive wrong or illusory knowledge, but a mere non-perception of the difference between two real experiences, one of which is a_ past experience. Where a mother-of-pearl is taken for silver, the difference between the mother-of-pearl seen at the moment and the silver remembered is not

Adhyasa] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 15

perceived. Naiy4yikas refute this definition on the ground that mere non-perception of the difference cannot induce us to action. But as a matter of fact we are tempted to possess the silver seen in a mother- of-pearl. Where there is no positive knowledge, as, for example, in profound sleep (Sushupti), there is no activity. It is positive knowledge that is responsible for our activity, as we find from our experience in the dream and waking states. Nor can a mere remembrance induce us to action. So in iliusion we are conscious of silver as a reality present before us, and not as a mere remembrance.

The Naiyayikas therefore define superimposition as “the fictitious assumption of attributes (like those of silver) contrary to the nature of the thing (e.g. the mother-of-pearl) on which something else (silver) is superimposed’’. An identity is established be- tween the object present before us (the mother-of- pearl) and the silver remembered, which is not here and now, but imagined, and which eaists as a reality somewhere else. The person is not conscious that it is only.a memory of silver, and not an actuality. This identity between the silver seen elsewhere and the mother-of-pearl is what gives rise to the illusion. There is thus a positive factor in this experience, which is not the case in the Prabhakaras’ definition. Yet it may be questioned how the silver which exists elsewhere can be in contact with the senses, which is essential if the silver is to be experienced as an actuality in front of us and not a mere memory.

If it be said that there is transcendental contact (Alaukika Jnanalakshana Sannikarsha) of the senses with it, then where fire is inferred from smoke we can say it is also a case of transcendental contact, and inference as a means to knowledge becomes unnecessary. Therefore we have to accept that in illusion an indescribable (Anirvachaniya) silver is produced, which is a reality for the time being. It is this silver which is directly perceived by the senses and gives rise to the knowledge, ‘‘This is silver’’. The silver that is seen in the mother-of-pearl is not present somewhere else, for in that case it could not have been experienced as here and now; nor is it in the mind. Neither is it a mere nonentity, for then it could not have been an object of percep- tion; nor can it be inherent in the mother-of-pearl, for in that case it could not have been sublated afterwards. So we are forced to say that the silver has no real existence anywhere, but has only an apparent reality for the time being which is unspeakable.

This superimposition is called ignorance (Avidya), metaphorically, the effect being put for the cause. Ignorance does not mean want of knowledge, but that kind of knowledge which is stultified later on by the knowledge of things as they are. Its counter- part is called knowledge (Vidya). When the Self is discriminated from its limiting adjuncts through vedantic discipline and practice (Sadhana), viz. hearing of scriptural texts, reflection, and meditation

Adhyasa] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 17

on them, then knowledge dawns, which destroys this superimposition. A mere intellectual knowledge is however not meant here, but uctual realization. Since through this superimposition the two objects are not in the least affected by the good or bad qualities of each other, once true knowledge dawns, it roots out ignorance with all its effects, leaving no chance of, its cropping up again. The recrudescence would have been pussible if owing to the super- imposition the Self was in any way contaminated by the non-Self and its properties.

This superimposition (Adhyasa) due to ignor- ance is the presumption on which are based the distinctions among the mean: of knowledge, objects of knowledge, and knowing persons, in our career of daily activity, and so are also based all scriptural texts, whether they refer to rituals (Karma) or know- ledge (Jnana). All our experience starts in this error which identifies the Self with the body, senses, etc. All cognitive acts presuppose this kind of false identification, for without it the pure Self can never be a knower, aud without a knowing personality, the means of right knowledge cannot operate. There- fore the means of right knowledge and the scriptural texts belong to the sphere of ignorance (Avidy4). They are meant only for one who is still under ignor- ance and has not realized the Self. They are valid! only so long as the ultimate Truth is not realized;: they have just a relative value. But from the stand- po of the ultimate Truth, our so-called. knowledge

is all Avidya or no knowledge at all. In the pheno- menal world, however, they are quite valid and are capable of producing empirical knowledge.

That our knowledge (empirical) is no knowledge at all is furtiier proved by the fact that we do not differ from animals in the matter of cognition. Just as a cow runs away when she sees a man with a raised stick in his hand, while she approaches one with a handful of green grass, so also do men, who possess higher intelligence, walk away from wicked persons shouting with drawn swords, while they approach those of an opposite nature. The behaviour of animals in cognition etc., is well known to be based on ignorance. Therefore it can be inferred that man’s conduct in the matter of cognition etc., s0 long as they are under delusion, is also similarly based.

It may seem rather strange to say that even the scriptures belong to the field of ignorance (Avidya); for though in ordinary matters of cognition etc. we may resemble animals and act through ignorance, yet in matters religious, such as the per- formance of sacrifices, the person who engages himself in them has the knowledge that the self is separate from the body, since otherwise he cannot expect to enjoy the fruits of his ritualistic acts in heaven, the body being destroyed at death. But we forget that though a person who engages himself in ritualistic acts may have a knowledge of the Self as distinct {from the body, yet it is not necessary that he should

Adhyisa] BRAUMA-SUTRAS 19

have a knowledge of the reai nature of the Self as given by the Vedanta texts; rather such knowledge is destructive to him. For how can a person who kuows the Self to be not an enjoyer, agent, and so forth undertake any sacrifice enjoined by the scriptures? Seriptural texts like. ‘“‘A Brahmana should perform a sacrifice,’ are operative only on the supposition that attributes such as caste, stage of life, age, and circu.nstances are superimposed on the Scif, which ‘s none of these. Not only is rituailism (Karmakanda) meant for persons under ignorance (Avidya), but even su is the Vedanta; for without the distinction of the means of knowledge, objects of knowledge, and knower it is not possible to comprehend the meaning of the Vedanta texts. A person who is conscious of these distinctions is under the sway of ignorance (Avidya), being in the world of duality. But there is a difference between Vedanta and ritualism. While the latter has for its goal that which is within the sphere of ignorance, like enjoyment in heaven etc., the former helps one to realize his true nature, which destroys all ignorance.

How can ignorance lead to knowledge? Empiric- al knowledge can produce transcendental knowledge through its empirical validity. To put it in Sri Ramakrishna’s beautiful language, ‘‘When we run a thorn in our hand we take it out by means of another thorn and throw out both. So relative knowledge ‘alone can remove that relative ignor- ance which blinds the eye of the Self. But such

20. BRAHMA-SUTRAS [Adhyasa

knowledge and such ignorance are both alike included in Avidya; hence the man who attains to the highest Knowledge (Jnana), the knowledge of the Absolute, does away in the end with both knowledge and ignorance, being free himself from all duality.’’ But before the dawning of real knowledge the authority of the Vedas stands unquestioned, for a knowledge that has not been realized cannot prevent a person from entering on ritualistic activities. It is only after realization that scriptural texts cease to be operative. But before that, ‘Let the scriptures be your authority in ascertaining what ought to be done and what ought not to be done. Having known what is said in the ordinance of the scriptures you should act here’? (Gita 16.24). But when realization dawns, then, ‘To the sage who has known the Self, all the Vedas are of so much use as a reservoir is when there is flood everywhere”’ (Gita 2. 46). It is only for the knower of Brahman that they have no value, and not for others.


CHAPTER I
---------

[Section I]

its pre-requisites.

TATA AAAAT Ne I

wa Now Wa: therefore s@iasia the inquiry (into the real nature) of Brahman.

1. Now (after the attainment of the requisite spiritual qualities) therefore (as the results obtained by sacrifices etc., are ephemeral, whereas the result of the knowledge of Brahman is eternal), the inquiry (into the real nature) of Brahman (which is beset with doubts owing to the conflicting views of various schools of philosophy, should be taken up).

At the very beginning the utility of such an inquiry is questioned.

Objection: Such an inquiry is not worth the trouble. An intelligent man generally does not ente? into an inquiry about an object which is already known, or the knowledge of which does not serve any useful purpose. He is always guided by utility. Now Brahman is such an object. As Brahman pure and unconditioned, there is no doubt or indefiniteness

about It, for we have such definitions as, ‘Brahman is Truth, Knowledge, Infinity’? (Taitt. 2.1). As identical with the Self (Atman)—which ‘the Vedanta holds—also, there is no doubt about Brahman; for the Self is nothing but the object of the notion of ‘I’, the empirical self which is well known to exist as something different from the body, senses, etc. Moreover, no one doubts his own existence. There is therefore no indefiniteness about Brahman, which would induce one to make an inquiry into It. The objection that this empirical self is a result of super- imposition (Adhydsa) of the non-Self on the Self and vice versa, and is therefore not the true Self, cannot be accepted, for such a _ superimposition between two absolutely contradictory objects is not possible. |

Again, the knowledge of this Self or Brahman which, as shown above, everyone possesses, cannot destroy the world phenomena and helfbne to attain Liberation, for they have been existing together side by side all along from time immemorial. And as there is no other knowledge of the Self besides ‘Ego- consciousness’, which can be called the true knowledge of the Self, there is no chance of the world phenom- ena ever ceasing to exist. In other words, the world is a reality, and not something illusory. So the knowledge of Brahman serves no useful purpose such as the attainment of Liberation from relative existence (Samsara). For these reasons an inquiry into Brahman is not desirable. |

11.1] __ BRABMA-SUTRAS 2

_ Aaswer: An inquiry into Brahman ‘s desir- able, because there is some indefiniteness with respect to It, for we find various conflicting views concerning {ts nature. Different schools of philosophy hold different views. Superimposition would have been an impossibility, and there would have been no indefinitcness about’ Brahman, if the empirical self had been the rea} Self. But it 1s not. The scrip- tures (Srutis) say that the Self is free from all limiting adjuncts and is infinite, all-blissful, all- knowing, One without a second, and so on. This the scriptures repeatedly inculcate, and as such it cannot be intcrpreted in any secondary or figurative sense. But the empiricai self is felt as occupying definite space, as when we say, ‘I am in the room’, as involved in manifold miseries, as ignorant, ete. How can this kind of notion be regarded as the true knowledge of the Self? To regard the Self, which is beyond limitation etc., as being limited etc., is itself an illusion, and hence superimposition is a self- evident fact. The result of the true knowledge of the Self leads to Liberation and so serves a very, very fruitful purpose. Therefore an inquiry about Brahman through an examination of the Vedanta texts dealing with It is worth while and should be undertaken. |

The word now in the Sutra is not used to introduce a new subject that is going to be taken up, in which sense it is generally used in other places, as for example, in the beginning of the Yoga-Sutras or

the Purva Mimamsé-Sutras. Neither is it used in any other sense, except that of immediate conse- cution, that is, it implies an antecedent, which existing, the inquiry about Brahman would be possible, and without which it would be impossible. This antecedent is neither the study of the Vedas, for it is a common requisite for Purva Mimamsa as well as Vedanta, nor the knowledge and per- formance of rituals prescribed by the Karmakanda, for these in no way help one who aspires after knowledge, but certain spiritual requisites. The spiritual requisites referred to are: (1) discrimina- tion between things permanent and _ transient, (2) renunciation of the enjoyment of fruits of action in this world and in the next, (8) the six treasures, as they are called, viz., not allowing the mind to externalize and checking the external instruments of the sense organs (Sama and Dama), not thinking of things of the senses (Uparati), ideal forbearance (Titiksha), constant practice to fix the mind in God (Samadhana), and faith (Sraddha); and (4) the intense desire to be free (Mumukshutvam).

AHATAEY TW: ll il

satfz Origin etc. (i.e. sustenance and dissolution) wa of this (world) aa: from which.

2. (Brahman is that omniscient, omnipotent cause) from which proceed the

1.1.2] BRAHMA-SUTRAS | 25

origin etc. (.e. sustenance and dissolu- tion) of this (world).

In the previous Sutra it has been established that an inquiry into Brahman should be made as it heips Liberation. Knowledge of Brahman leads to Liberation. Now in order that we may attain this knowledge of Brahman, It must have some characteristics by which It can be known; otherwise it is not possible to have such knowledge. The opponent holds that Brahman has no such character- istics by which It can be defined, and in the absence of a definition there can be no knowiedge of Brahman, and consequertly no Freedom.

This Sutra refutes thet objection and gives a definition of Brahman: ‘‘That which is the cause of the world is Brahman’’—where the imagined ‘“Ceause of the world’? is indicative of Brahman. This is called the Tatastha Lakshana, or that characteristic of a thing which is distinct from its nature and yet serves to make it known. In the definition given by this Sutra, the origin, sustenance, and dissolution are characteristics of the world and as such are in no way related to Brahman, which is eternal and changeless; yet these indicate Brahman, which is imagined to be the cause of the world, just as an imagined snake indicates the rope when we say, ‘‘that which is the snake is the rope’’.

The scriptures give another definition of Brahman which describes Its true nature: ‘Truth,

260 | BRAHMA-SUTRAS

Knowledge, Infinity is Brahman.” This is called the Svarupa Lakshana, that which defines Brahman in Its true essence. These words, though they have different meanings in ordinary parlance, yet refer to the one indivisible Brahman, even as the words, father, son, brother, husband, etc., refer to one and the same person according to his relation with different individuals.

It must not however be thought that the First Cause of the universe is arrived at by this Sutra through mere reasoning, inference, and other means of right knowledge usually valid in this sense world. Brahman cannot be so established independently of the scriptures (Sruti). Though from the effect, the world, we can infer that it must have a cause, we eannot establish with certainty what exactly is the nature of that cause. We cannot say that Brahman alone is the cause and nothing else, as Brahman is not an object of the senses. The relation of cause and effect can be established where both the objects are perceived. Inference etc. may give only strong suggestions of Brahman’s being the First Cause of the world. A thing established by mere inference, however well thought out, is explained otherwise by greater intellects. Reasoning also is endless accord- ing to the intellectual capacity of people and there- fore cannot go far in the ascertainment of Truth. So the scriptures ought to be the basis of all reasoning. It is experience that carries weight, and the scriptures are authoritative because they are the records of

1.1.2] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 27

the experience of master minds that have come face to face with Reality (Aptavakya). That is why the scriptures ar? infallible. Hence in ascertaining the First Cause the scriptures alone are authority. The prime object of this Sutra, therefore, is not to establish Brahman through inference but to discuss scriptural passages which declare’ that Brahman is the First Cause—texts like> ‘That from which these beings sare born, by which they live after birth and into which they enter at death— try to know That. That is Brahman’ (Taitt. 3.1). The Sutra collects the Vedanta texts for the full com- prehension ot Brahman. Once the scriptures have declared Brahman to be the First Cause, reasoning ete. may be taken advantage of in so far as they de not contradict the scriptures, but rather supple- ment them, in ascertaining the sense of the Vedanta texts. Such reasoning must be corroborative of the truth inculeated. This kind of reasoning includes the hearing of the texts (Sravana), thinking about their meaning (Manana), and meditation on them (Nididhydsana). This leads to intuition. By intuition is meant that mental modification (Vritti) of the mind (Chitta) which destroys our ignorance about Brahman. When the ignorance is destroved by this mental modification in the form of Brahman (Brahmakara Vritti), Brahman, which is_ self- luminous, reveals Itself. In ordinary perception when we cognize an object the mind (Chitta) takes the form of the external object, which destroys the

ignorance about it, and consciousness reflected in this modification of the mind manifests the object. In the case of Brahman, however, the mental modifica- tion destroys the ignorance, but Brahman, which is consciousness pure and simple, manifests Itself, being self-luminous. That is why the scriptures describe Brahman as ‘Not this’, ‘Not this’, thus removing the ignorance about it. Nowhcre is Brahman des- cribed positively, as ‘It is this’, ‘It is this’.

There is thus a difference between an inquiry into Brahman and an inquiry into religious duty (Dharma Jijnasa). In the latter case, the scriptures alone are authority. Purva Mimamsa says that if you do such and such a thing, you will get such and such results. It is something yet to come and does not exist at the time. So no other proof is available regarding the truth of these statements except faith in them. But Vedanta speaks about Brahman, which is an already existing entity, and not dependent on human endeavour. Therefore besides faith in the scriptural texts there are other means available to corroborate its statements. That is why there is room for reasoning etc. in Vedanta.

scriptures.

mrreratfearcare. tt 3

mrea-Mifraty The scripture being the means of right knowledge.

1.1.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 29

3. The scriptures (alone) being the ineans of right knowledge (with regard to Brahman. the proposition laid in Sutra 2 becomes corroboratcd).

This Sutra makes ihe idea expressed in Sutra 2 clearer. If{ any doubt has been left regarding the fact that Brahman as the origin ete. of the world is established by scriptural authority and not by inference ctc. independently of it, this Sutra makes it clear that Srutis alone are proof about Brahman.

Objection: Brehman is an already existing thing like a pot, and so It can be known by other means of right knowledge independently of the scriptures.

Answer: Brahman has no form etc. and so can- not be cognized by direct perception. Again in the absence of inseparable characteristics, as smoke is of fire, It cannct be established by inference or analogy (Upamina). Therefore, It can be known only through the scriptures. The scriptures themselves say, ‘‘One who is ignorant of the scriptures cannot know that Brahman’’. No doubt, as already referred

 This Sutra can also be interpreted in another wey. It has been said in Sutra 2 that Brahman, which 1s the cause of this manifold universe, must naturally be omnis- cient. This Sutra corroborates it. In that case it would read: ‘(The omniscience and omnipotence of Brahman follow from Its) being the source of the scriptures.” The scriptures declare that the Lord Himself breathed forth the Vedas. S« He who has produced these scriptures contain- ing such stupendous knowledge cannot but be omniscient and omnipotent.

to in the previous Sutra, these means of right know- ledge also have a scope, but it is only after Brahman is established by the scriptures—as supplementary to them and not independent of them.

Vedanta teats.

TI AAAI 8

aq That g but waanq because It is the main purport.

4. But that (Brahman is to be known only from the scriptures and not independ- ently by any other means is established) because It is the main purport (of al) Vedanta texts).

Objection by Purva Mimdémsakas: The Vedanta texts do not refer to Brahman. The Vedas cannot possibly aim at giving information regarding such self-established, alréady existing objects like Brahman, which can be known through other sources. They generally give information only about objects that cannot be known through other means of right knowledge, and about the means to attain such objects. Again Brahman, which is our own Self, can neither be desired nor shunned and as such cannot be an object of human effort. So a mere statement of fact about an existing object like Brahman, incapable of being desired or shunned and therefore useless, would make the scriptures purposeless.

1.1.4] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 31

Vedic passspes have a meaning only in so far as they are related to some action. So the Vedanta texts, to have a meaning, must be so construed as to be connected with action (rituals), as supplementing them with some necessary information. The texts dealing with the individual soui in the Vedanta, therefore, refer to the agent; those dealing with Brahman refer to the Deities; and those dealing with creation refer to spiritual practices (Sadhands). In that case, being supplementary to actiou, the Vedanta texts wil] have a purpose. But if they are taken to refer to Brahman only, they will be meaningless, inasmuch as thev will not be helpful to any action.

Answer: The word but ir the Sutra refutes all these objections. The Vedanta texts refer to Brahman «..!y, for all of them have Brahman for their main topic. The main purport of a treatise is gathered from the following characteristics: (1) Beginning and _ conclusion, (2) repetition, (3) uniqueness of subject-matter, (4) fruit or result, (5) praise, and (6) reasoning. These six help to arrive at the real aim or purport of any work. In chapter six of the Chhandogya Upanishad, for example, Brahman is the main purport of all the paragraphs; for all these six characteristics point to Brahman. It begins, ‘“‘This universe, my boy, was but the Real (Sat), in the beginning’? (Chh. 6.2.1), and concludes by saying, “‘In it all that exists has its self. It is true. It is the Self’? (Ibid. 6.15.2)—

$2. BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.1.4

which also refers to the Sat or Brahman. In the frequent repetition, ‘‘You art That, O Svetaketu’’, the same Brahman is referred to. The uniqueness of Brahman is quite apparent, as It cannot be realized either by direct perception or inference in the absence of form ete. and characteristics respect- ively. Reasoning also has been adopted by the scriptures here by citing the example of clay to elucidate their point. As different objects are made out of clay, so are all things created from this Brahman. The description of the origin of the universe from Brahman, and of its sustenance by and reabsorption in It is by way of praise (Artha- vada). The result or fruit (Phala) is also mentioned, wiz. that through the knowledge of Brahman every- thing else is known. When we realize Brahman the universal Reality, we know all the particulars involved in It. So all these six characteristics go to show that the main topic of the Vedanta texts, as cited above, is Brahman.

Again, these texts cannot be made to refer to the agent etc., for they are treated in quite a different section from the Karmakanda. Neither are the texts useless, for from the comprehension of these texts results Liberation, without any reference to action on the part of the person, even as a mere statement that it is a rope and not a snake helps to destroy one’s illusion. A mere intellectual grasp of the texts, however, will not help the person to attain Liberation; actual realization is what is meant here.

1.1.4] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 38

Oljection: The scriptures have a purpose in sv far as they lay down injunctions for man. They either induce him to or prohibit him from some action. The very mcaning of the word ‘Sastra’ is this. Even the Vedanta texts are related to injunctions and thus bave a purpose. For though they have Brahman for their main purport, yet they do not end there, but after describing the nature of Brahman they enjoin on man to realize Brahman through intuition. ‘‘The Self is to be realized——to be heard of, thought abcut, and meditated upon’’— in passages like this the scriptures, after enjoining on man tc be conversant first with the nature of Brahman, further enjoin thinking and meditation on the meaning of those passages for the attainment of direct experience. Thus they formulate injunctions with regard to the knowledge of Brahman.

Answer: ‘He who knows the Supreme Brahman becomes Brahman indeed’? (Mu. 3. 2. 9)—texts like this show that to know Brahman is to become Brahman. But since Brahman is an already existing entity, we cannot say that to know. Brahman involves an act, like a ritualistic act, having for its result Brahman. When ignorance is removed Brahman manifests Itself, even as when the illusion of the snake is removed the rope manifests itself. Here the rope is not the creation of any act. The identity of the individual soul and Brahman set forth in texts like, I am Brahman’’ (Brih. 1. 4. 10), 1s not a fancy or imagination, but an actuality, and therefore differs

from meditation and devout worship as prescribed by the scriptures in texts like, ‘‘One should meditate on the mind as Brahman’’, and ‘The Sun _ is Brahman’’ (Cbh. 3. 18. 1; 8. 19. 1). The knowledge of Brahman, therefore, does not depend on human endeavour, and hence it is impossible to connect Brahman or the knowledge of It with any action. Neither can Brahman be said to be the object of the act of knowing; for there are texts like, “‘It is differ- ent from the known, again It is beyond the unknown’’ (Ken. 1, 4), and ‘Through what, O Maitreyi, can the knower be known?” (Brih. 2. 4. 14). In the same way Brahman is denied as an object of devout wor- ship (Upasana)—‘‘Know that alone to be Brahman, not that which people adore here’? (Ken. 1. 5). The scriptures, therefore, never describe Brahman as this or that, but only negate manifoldness which is false, in texts like, ‘‘There is no manifoldness in It’”’ (Kath. 2. 4. 11), and ‘‘He who sees manifoldness in It goes from death to death’? (Kath. 2. 4. 10).

Moreover, the result of action is either creation, modification, purification or attainment. None of these is applicable to the knowledge of Brahman, which is the same thing as Liberation. If Liberation were created or modified, it would not be permanent, and no school of philosophers is prepared to accept such a contingency. Since Brahman is our Inner Self, we cannot attain It by any action, as a village is attained by our act of going. Nor is there any

1.1.4] BRAHMA-SUOTRAS 35

room for a purificatory ceremony in the eternally pure Self.

Knowledge itself, again, cannot be said to be an activity of the mind. An action depends upon human endeavour and is not bound up with the nature of things. It can either be dune, or not done or modified by the agent. Knowledge, on tne other hand, does not depend upon hrman notions, but on the thing itself. It is the result of the right means, having for its objects existing things. Knowledge cam therefore neither be made, nor not made, nor modified. Although mental, it differs from such meditiutions as ““Man is fire, O Gautama’’, ‘‘Woman is fire’’, ete.

Thus Brahman or the krowledge of Brahman being in no wav connected with action, injunctions have no place with regard to It. Therefore texts like, ‘‘The Atman is to be realized’’ etc., though imperative in character, do not lay down any injunc- tion, but are intended to turn the mind of the aspirant from things external, which keep one bound to this relative existence, and direct it inwards. Further it is not true that the scriptures can have a purpose if only they enjoin or prohibit some action, for even by describing existing things they serve a useful purpose, if thereby they conduce to the well- being of man, and what can do this better than the knowledge of Brahman, which results in Libera- tion? The comprehension of Brahman _ includes hearing, reasoning, and meditation. Mere hearing

does not result in full comprehension or realization of Brahman. MJeasoning and meditation are also subservient to that full comprehension. Hence it cannot be said that they are enjoined. If after full comprehension Brahman was found to be related to some injunction, then only it could be said to be supplementary to action.

So Brahman is in no way connected with action. All the Vedanta texts deal with an independent topic, which is Brahman, and these texts are the only proof of this Brahman, as it is not possible to know It through any other source.:

So far it has been shown in the previous Sutras. that all the Vedanta texts refer exclusively to Brahman without any connection whatsoever with action, and that Brahman is the omniscient, omni- potent cause of the origin etc. of this universe. Here the Sankhyas raise an _ objection: The Vedanta texts abéut creation do not refer to Brahman but tothe unintelligent Pradhana made up of the three Gunas (constituents)—Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas, as the First Cause. The Pradhana is omnipotent with respect to its effects. Again the Pradhana has Sattva for one of its components, of which, according to Smriti (Gita 14. 17), knowledge is an attribute. Therefore the Pradhana can figuratively be said to be omniscient, because of its capacity for all knowl- edge. To Brahman, on the other hand, which is isolated and pure intelligence itself, you cannot

1.1.5] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 37

ascribe all-knowiagness or partial-knowledge. More- over, as the Pradhana has three components, it seems reasonable that it alone is capable of undergoing modifications, like clay, into various objects of name and form, and not Brahman, which is uncompounded, homogeneous and unchangeable. Moreover, the First Cause is au already existing entity and so can be established by inference from its effects and even the scriptures recommend inference of the cause from the effect. So what the Vedanta texts about creation say with respect to the First Cause holds good, and more aptly sc, in the case of the Pradhana, and

therefore it is the First Cause referred to by the scriptures.

principle. Sutras 5-11 refute these arguments of the Sankhyas and establish Brahman as the First Cause. The discussicn mainly refers to the sixth chapter of

the Chhandogya Upanishad. CAAT, ANTAL | & I

saa: On account of thinking (seeing) 4 is not “meq not based on the scriptures.

5. On account of thinking (being attributed to the First Cause by the scrip- tures, the Pradhana) is not (the First Cause referred to by them); it (Pradhana) is not based on the scriptures.

The First Cause is said, in the scriptures, to have willed or thought before creation. ‘This universe, my dear, was but the Real (Sat) in the beginning—One only without a second. It thought, ‘may I be many, may I grow!’ and It projected fire (Chh. 6. 2. 2-3). “It (the Atman) willed, ‘Let me project worlds!’ So It projected these worlds’’ (Ait. 1. 1. 1-2). Such thinking or willing is not possible to the insentient Pradhana. It is possible only if the First Cause is an intelligent principle like Brahman.

The all-knowingness attributed to the Pradhana because of its Sattva component is inadmissible, as Sattva is not predominant in the Pradhana, since all the three Gunas are in a state of equilibrium. If in spite of this it is said to be capable of producing knowledge, then the other two Gunas must be equally capable of retarding knowledge. So while Sattva will make it all-knowing, Rajas and Tamas will make it partly knowing, which is a contradiction.

That all-knowingness and creation are not possi- ble to Brahman, which is pure intelligence itself and unchangeable, is also not true. For Brahman can be all-knowing and creative through Maya. So Brahman, the Sat of the text quoted, which thought, is the First Cause.

The Sankhyas again try to avoid the difficulty created by thinking being attributed to the First Cause thus: In the same text quoted above it is said further on, ‘‘That fire thought, ‘may I be many, may I grow!’ and it projected water.... Water

1.1.6{ BRAHMA-SUTRAS 39

thought,... it projected earth’? (Chh. 6. 2. 3-4). Here fire and water arc material things, and yet think- ing Is aitributec to them. Similarly the thinking by the Sat (Rea), in the text originally quoted, can also be taken figuratively, in which case the Pradhana, though insentient, can yet be the First Cause.

This argument the following Sutra refutes.

aTorste, a, StTeAMEaTa & mu: Secondary (figuretive) 3q if (it be said) 4 not Sawelq becausc of the werd ‘Self? (Atman).

6. Tf it be said (that ‘thinking’) is used in a secondary sense (with regard to Sat); (we say) not so, because of the word ‘Self? (by which the First Cause is referred to in the scriptures).

‘he Sat (Real) of the text cited in the previous Sutra after ereating fire, water, etc. thought, ‘‘Let me now entcr into these three as this living self (Jiva) and evolve names and forms’’ (Chh. 6. 3. 2.). The Sat, the First Cause, refers to the intelligent principle, the Jiva, as its self. The insentient Pra- dhana cannot refer to an intelligent principle like the Jiva as its self or as its own nature.

The Sankhyas again try to ward off this objection by saying that the word ‘Self? (Atman) is equally used to refer to intelligent and non-intelligent things, as, for example, in expressions like Bhutaéatma (the self of the elements), Indriyatma (the self of the

senses), etc., and so can be used in connection with the Pradhana also. The next Sutra refutes this argument.

aferger atemtazareg tl 8

afaze To one who is devoted to that ( Sat ) aawemq because Liberation is declared.

7. (That Pradhana cannot be desig- nated by the word ‘Self’ is established) be- cause Liberation is declared to one who is devoted to that Sat (the First Cause).

The sixth chapter of the Chhandogya Upanishad ends by instructing Svetaketu thus: ‘You art that.”? An intelligent being such as Svetaketu cannot be identified with the insentient Pradhana. More- over, in section 14, paragraphs 2-3 of this chapter, Liberation is said to result to one who is devoted to this Sat, and it cannot result from meditation on the insentient Pradhana. For these reasons, given in the previous Sutra and in this, the ‘Sat.’ the First Cause, does not refer to the Pradhana but to an intelligent principle.

SACATTAATS | < 1

vaaiaama Fitness to be abandoned not being stated (by the scriptures) 4 and.

8. And because it is not stated (by the scriptures) that It (Sat) has to be abandoned, (Pradhana cannot be denoted by the word ‘Sat’).

1.1.9] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 41

If tae intention of the scriptures had been to take the aspirant step by step from grosser to subtler truths tiil finally the real nature of the Atman was presented to him, and for this purpose they had referred to the Pradhéna—denoted by the word ‘Sat’ according to the Saénkhyar—as ihe Self, then there would have been later on a statement to the effect that this Pradhane must be dropped, for it was not the real Self. But there is no such statement in the texis In question. On the contrary, the whole chap- ter of the Chhandogya Upanishad, in which the texts occur, deals with the Self as nothing but that Sat. Moreover, this chapter begins with the question, “What is that which being known everything is known?’’ Now if the Pradhana were the First Cause, then by knowing it everything would be known, which is not a fact. The enjoyer (Purusha}, which is different from it, not being a product of the Pradhana like the objects of enjoyment, cannot be known by knowing the Pradhana. Therefore the Pradhana is not the First Cause, knowing which everything is known, according to the scriptures. Such a view will contradict the premise.

SATCTATA tt & Ut aimqq On account of resolving or merging in one’s own Self. 9. On account of (the individual soul) merging in its own Self (or the universal Self referred to as the Sat, in deep sleep,

the Pradhana cannot be denoted by the word ‘Self’).

‘‘When a man is said to be thus asleep, he is united with the Sat, my child—he merges in his own Self’? (Chh. 6. 8. 1). Here it is taught that the individ- ual soul merges in the Sat, and as it is impossible for the intelligent soul to merge in the imsentient Pradhana, the latter cannot be the First Cause denoted by the word ‘Sat’ in the text.

TeATATRATA | Lo Il

afaarareana On account of the uniformity of views.

10. Because (all the Vedanta texts) uniformly refer to (an intelligent principle as the First Cause, Brahman is to be taken as that Cause).

scriptures themselves say, ‘‘Whom all the Vedas proclaim’? (Kath. 1. 2. 15).

TACATS ll Lk tl gqaaiq Being declared by the Vedas 4 also.

11. (The all-knowing Brahman alone is the First Cause of this world) because (it is so known directly) from the Vedas also.

“‘He is the Cause, the Lord of the ruler of the sense organs (Jivatman) and has neither parent.

1.1.11] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 43

nor Lord’’ (Svev. 6. 9)—whcre ‘He’ refers to the all- knowing Lord described in that chapter.

Therefore it is established that the omniscient, omnipotent Brahman 1s the First Cause and not the insentent Pradhana or anything else.

From Sutra 12 onwards till practically the end of the first chaptcr a new topic is taken up for discussion, viz. whether certain terms found in the Upanishads ure used in their ordinary senses or as referring to Brahman. Again the Upanishads speak of two types of Brahman, the Nirguna or Brahman without attributes and the Saguna or Brahman with attributes. It is the latter which is within the domain of Nescience end is the object of meditation (Upasana). which is of different kinds yielding different results; while the Nirguna Brah- man, which is free from all imaginary limit- ing adjuncts of the other type is the object of Knowledge. Meditation on the Saguna Brahman cannot lead to immediate Liberation. It can at best lead to gradual Liberation (Krama-Mukti). The knowledge of the Nirguna Brahman alone leads to immediate Liberation. Now in many places in the Upanishads Brahman is described apparently with qualifying adjuncts; yet the scriptures say that the knowledge of that Brahman leads to immediate Liberation. If Brahman is worshipped as limited by those adjuncts, it cannot lead to such Liberation. But if these qualifying adjuncts are regarded as not

being ultimately aimed at by the Sruti, but used merely as indicative of Brahman, then these very texts would refer to the Nirguna Brahman and Libera- tion would be the immediate result of knowing that Brahman. So by reasoning we have to arrive at a conclusion as to the true significance of these texts, which obviously have a doubtful import.

The issue of the Saguna and Nirguna Brahman as shown above is not, however, kept up all through, for in many places it is not between them but bet- ween the Saguna Brahman and the individual soul or something else.

ATAPAAA SATATA tl 22

wereaa: “The Self consisting of bliss’? wareq because of the repetition.

12. (In the passage) “The Self con- sisting of bliss” etc. (Brahman, which is spoken of as the tail, is put forward as an independent entity and not as something subordinate to Anandamaya, the Self con- sisting of bliss) on account of the repeti- tion (of Brahman as the main topic in many passages of that chapter).

In topic 5 the word ‘thinking’ attributed to the First Cause is interpreted in its direct sense, thus establishing the intelligent principle Brahman as the First Cause, and the figurative meaning, which would

1.1.12] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 45

have established the Pradhana, is thrown out as being doubtful. But here such a thing, that is the estab- lishing of Brahman, is impossible, for the terms aenoting parts allow no room for doubt, thus making it impossible to interpret the texts as referring to Brahman. This connects the preseut topic with the last one by way of objection.

The passage in cuestion is: ‘Different from this self, which consists of understanding (Vijn4- namuaya), is the inner self which consists of bliss.... Joy is the head, satisfaction is its right wing, rap- ture is its left wing, bliss is its trunk, Brahman is the tail, the support”? (Taitt. 2. 5). The Sutra says that here Brahman, which is spoken of as the tail, is treat- ed as an independent entity and 3s not to be taken as a part of “‘the self consisting of bliss,’’ for ‘tail’ here does not mean the limb, in which sense it is generally used, but the support of the individual soul made up of ‘‘the self consisting of bliss’’, as Brahman is the substratum of the imaginary individual soul. This conclusion is arrived at, because Brahman without any limiting adjuncts whatsoever is again and again reiterated in these Taittiriya texts.

[Sutras 12-19 are interpreted by the Vrittikara (who is probably Upavarsha) as follows: The Taittiriya Upanishad 2. 1-4 after enumerating the selves consisting of food, vital force, mind, and understanding, speaks of ‘“‘the self consisting of bliss’? in the passage quoted above. (Taitt. 2. 5). The question is whether this refers to the individual

soul or Brahman. The opponent holds that it refers to the individual soul, because the word ‘Ananda- maya’ denotes a modification and therefore cannot refer to Brahman, which is unchangeable. Moreover, five different parts are enumerated of this Ananda- maya, the self consisting of bliss; this is not possible in the case of Brahman, which is without farts. Sutras 12-19, according to this interpretation, main- tain that ‘Anandamaya’, the self consisting of bliss, refers to Brahman on account of the repetition of the word ‘Anandamaya’ in these Taittiriya texts. Repeti- tion has already been said to be one of the character- istics by which the subject-matter of a passage is ascertained. Brahman, again, has been proved to be the main topic of the Vedanta texts (Ch. ], Sec. 1, Sutra 4). Therefore ‘Anandamaya’ refers to Brahman. Moreover, the opening words of the second chapter of the Taittiriya Upanishad, ‘Truth, Knowledge, Infinity is Brahman’? (Taitt. 2. 1), and texts like, ‘‘He projected all this’? (Taitt. 2. 6), make it clear that Brahman is the topic. The termination ‘mayat’ is also not out of place in Brahman, for it is used here to denote an abundance of bliss. The possession of a body having parts 1s also ascribed to It, only because of the immediately preceding limiting condition, viz. the self consisting of understanding and does not really belong to It. Hence ‘‘the self consisting of bliss’’ is the highest Brahman.

Sankara objects to this interpretation of the

1.1.13] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 47

Sutras and says that Anaudamaya cannot be the highest Brahmen. First of all, there is no justifica- tion, for suddvury changing the interpretation of the wfix ‘mayat’ from modification in the case of Vij- nanaiaya, Pranamaya, ete. in the preceding pass- ages to abunaance in tne ease of Anandamaya, so as to make this word refer to Brahman. Again the very idea of vreponderance or abundance of bliss suggests that there is alsu misery in it, hcwever slight. Such an idea with respect to Brahman is absurd. So Sankara replaces this interpretation of the Sutras, which Anandagiri attributes to the Vrittikara, by another, which we have reproduced above. ]

faarenarafa Sq, 4, Tsay 23

faai<xeetq On account of a word { ‘tail’ ) denoting part 4 is not sta 4q if it be said 4 not so myatq on account of abundance (of terms denoting parts).

13. Uf it be said (that Brahman) is not (spoken of as an independent entity in the passage) on account of a word (‘tail’) denoting part, (we reply) not so, on account of abundance (of terms denot- ing parts).

Owing to the abundance of phraseology denoting parts or limbs in the Taittiriya texts 2. 1-5, Brahman is designated as the tail just to keep up the foregoing imagery; but it 1s not intended to convey the idea that Brahman is actually a part or member of ‘‘the

self consisting of bliss’’. The object of the scriptures. is to teach the knowledge of the real Self. If the. ‘‘self consisting of bliss’? were the real Self, the scrip- tures would refer to this in the concluding texts, but. as a matter of fact they do not; on the other hand they refer to the Nirguna Brahman, which is there- fore the real subject-matter. Brahman’s being the tail means, not that It is a part, but that It is the main support or abode of everything.

‘AE TSATAMB | Le Il

aaqaaemq Because (It) is declared to be the cause of it 4 and.

14. And because (Brahman) is de- clared to be the cause of it (the self consisting of bliss), Brahman cannot be taken as a part of it).

Brahman is the cause of everything, even of “the self consisting of bliss’’, as also of the four earlier named ones, viz. the self consisting of food, vital force, mind, and understanding. ‘‘He pro- jected all this whatever there is’? (Taitt. 2. 6). The cause canot be a part of the effect.

ataqaformaa a rad i 24 tl

araafaaa That which has been referred to in the Mantra portion 4 the very same 4 moreover waza is sung.

15. Moreover that very Brahman which has been referred to in the Mantra.

1.1.17] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 49

portion is sung (in this Brahmana passage as the tail).

The secord chapter of the Taittiriya Upanishad begins, ‘‘He who knows Brahman attains the Highest

Brahman is Truth, Knowledge and Infinity.”’ This very Brahman is finai:y declared to be the tail. Otherwise there would be a contradiction between the Mantra and Brahmara portions, which cannot be, for the Brahamanas only explain what the Mantras declare. Therefore Brahman is the primary subject- matter and is not treated as a part of ‘‘the self consisting of bliss’’.

AactsgITa: LE

a Not sat: the other (Jiva) 8qqg%: on account of impossibility.

16. (Brahman and) not the other (the individual soul, is meant here) on account of the impossibility (of that assumption).

He who is referred to in the passage, ‘‘The self consisting of bliss’? etc. is said to be the creator of everything. ‘He projected all this whatever there is’’ (Taitt. 2. 6). This the individual soul cannot possi- — bly do and so is not referred to in the passage, °The self consisting of bliss’’ etc.

AAAS I 9 tl Heuremia On account of the declaration of differ-

ence 4@ and.

17. And on account of the declara- tion of difference (between the two, 12.e. the one referred to in the passage, “The self consisting of bliss” etc. and the indi- vidual soul, the latter cannot be the one referred to in the passage).

That which is referred to in the passage, ‘‘The self consisting of bliss’? etc. is said to be of the essence of flavour, attaining which the individual soul is blissful. ‘‘It (That which is referred to in the passage, ‘‘The self consisting of bliss’’ etc.) is flavour; only after attaining (this essence of) flavour is this (soul) blissful’? (Taitt. 2. 7). Now that which is attained and the attainer cannot be the same. So the individual soul is not referred to in that passage under discussion.

RATS ATGFATTTTAAT tl XS Il aratq On account of the word ‘bliss’, literally ‘desire’, (denoting Brahman) 4 and aqarnta (Anan- damaya also) cannot be inferred as Brahman.

18. And on account of the word ‘bliss’, literally ‘desire’, (referring to Brahman), (you) cannot infer (Ananda- maya is also Brahman, since the suffix ‘mayat’ is used to denote modification).

In the scriptures the word ‘bliss’ is often used for Brahman; from this we cannot infer that Ananda- maya, the self consisting of bliss, is also Brahman, for

1.1.20] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 51

the suffix ‘mayat’ shows that it is a modification. ‘This sets aside tie whole of the interpretation of the Vrittikéra mentioned under Sutra 12.

aferaea a aera surfs ti 2 Il

wfaq In this We its (the Jiva’s) 4 also att mergence as that wift teaches.

1g. (The Vedas) also teach of its (the Jiva’s) becoming (on the dawning of Knowledge) one with this (referred to in the passage under discussion).

Since the individual soul, on the, dawning of Knewledge, becomes one with chat which is referred to in the passage under discussion, the latter must be Brahman.

Hence ‘‘the self consisting of bliss’? is in no way the principal topic of these texts. It is Brahman which is the support of everything that is dealt with as an independent entity in these texts.

Brahman.

VACA TATTSNT tl Ro |

wa: Within agatqemq because Its characteristics are mentioned.

20. (The one) within (the sun and the eye is Brahman), because Its character- istics are mentioned (therein).

‘Now that golden person who is seen within the sun, with a golden beard and golden hair... is named Ut, for he has risen (udita) above all evils. - - Rik and Saéman are his joints... He is the lord of the worlds beyond the sun and of all objects desired by the gods’’ (Cbhh. 1. 6. 6-8). ‘‘Now the person who is seen in the eye is Rik; he is Saman, Uktha, Yajus, Brahman. The form of that person in the eye is the same as that of the other (the person in the sun), the joints of the one are the joints of the other, the name of the one is the name of the other. - - He is the lord of the world beneath the body and of all objects desired by men”’ (Chh. 1. 7. 5-8). In the last topic, in spite of things to the contrary, the very fact of the repitition of Brahman in the texts helped us to arrive at the conclusion that Brahman was the topic of those texts. Following the same argument, the repetition of abode, form, limitations, etc., in the texts cited ought to make some individual soul which has attained to that eminence of being the presiding deity of the solar orb, and not Brahman, the topic of these texts—this is the objection.

The Sutra refutes this and says that the persan spoken of is the Highest Brahman, as its character- istics—such as being above all evils, being the self of everything like Rik, Yajus, Saman (these few being mentioned only by way of example), and his being the lord of the worlds beyond the sun and also of the worlds beneath the body—are mentioned. The mention of a particular abode, viz. the sun, and the

1.1.22] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 58

eye, of iorm, as having a beard, and being golden in colour, and of a limitation of powers is only for the purpose of mneditation (Upasané). The Highest Lord may, in order to gratify His devout worshippers, assume through Maya any form He likes. It is for the convenience of meditation that these limitations are imagined in Brahman, which otherwise, in Its true neture, is beyond them.

VSSNTGAMTAIEN: | AL Il

Reaqenr On account of a distinction being made 4 also W4: is different.

21. Also on account of a distinction being made (in another text between the two, i.e. the person in the sun and the individual soul animating the sun) (the Lord) is different (from the latter).

‘fe who dwells in the sun and is within the sun, whom, the sun dues not know, whose body the sun is and who rules the sun from within, is your Self, the ruler within, the immortal’’ (Brih. 3. 7. 9)—this text clearly shows that the Highest Lord is within the sun and yet different from the individual soul identifying itself with the sun. This confirms the ‘view expressed in the last Sutra.

undersiood as Brahman.

In the last topic the characteristics like “being ‘above all evil’? ete., being of doubtful import were

made to refer to Brahman and not to the deity of the solar orb and accordingly the mention of form etc. were interpreted to be imagined in Brahman for the sake of meditation. But now the character- istics mentioned in the text that are taken up for discussion are not of doubtful import but refer clearly to elemental ether, so how will you interpret these texts—seems to be the view of the objector.

STATA CSSTA RI

wrata; (The word) Akasa afawiq on account of the characteristic marks of that (Brahman).

22. (The word) Akasa (ether) (is Brahman) on account of the characteristic marks of That (1e. Brahman) (being mentioned).

 “What is the goal of this world?’ ‘Akasa,’ he

replied. For all these beings take their rise from Akasa only and dissolve in it. Akasa is greater than these. It is their ultimate goal. It indeed is the Supreme Udgitha.... He who knowing this as such meditates on the Supreme Udgitha... ”” (Chh. 1. 9. 1-2). Here ‘Akasa’ refers to Brahman and not to the elemental Akasa (ether), as the characteristics of Brahman, namely, the rise of the entire creation from it and its return to it at dis- solution are mentioned. No doubt these marks may also refer to the ether, as the scriptures say that from the ether is produced air, from air fire, etc., and they return to the ether at the end of a cycle. But then

1.1.23] BRAHMA-SITRAS. 55

the force of the words ‘all these’ and ‘only’ in the text quoted wsu'!d be lost. To preserve it the text should be taken to refer to the fundamental cause of all, including the ether, which can be Brahman alone. The word ‘Akasa’ is also used for Brahman in other texts: ‘“‘That which is called Akésa is the revealer of all forms and names.”? (Chh. 8. 14. 1). Again Brahman alone can be ‘greater than all’ and ‘their ultimate goal’ as inentioned in the text. In other scriptural passages like. ‘“‘He is greater than the earth, He is greater than the heavens”’ (Chh. 3. 14. 3), ‘Brahman is knowledge and Bliss. It is the ultimate goal of him who makes gifts’? (Brih. 3. 9. 28)—these qualities of being greater and the ultimate goal of everything are mentioned, and therefore this interpretation is justified. Hence the Udgitha in the text cited is to be meditated upon not as a symbol of the ether but of Brahman.

as Brahman.

Aa TT ATT: |i X23 Il

wa wa For the sanie reason aw: (the word) Prana (refers to Brahman).

23. For the same reason (the word) ‘Prana’ (also refers to Brahman).

‘Which is that deity?’ ‘Prana,’ he said. For all these beings merge in Prana alone and from Prana they arise’? (Chh. 1. 11. 4-5). The question 1s

whether Prastava (a division of SAman) is a symbol of the vital force or Brahman. Here Prana does not mean the vital force but Brahman, in which sense it is used in texts like, ‘‘The Prana of Prana’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 18). Why? Because the characteristic of Brahman, ‘‘All these beings merge in Prana,’’ etc. is mentioned. All the Jivas merge in Prana, and that is possible only if ‘Prana’ is Brahman and not the vital force (the ordinary sense of the word), in which only the senses get merged in deep sleep.

as Brahman.

In the two previous topics, on account of the characteristics of Brahman being present in the texts quoted, it was possible to conclude that Brahman was referred to in them. The next Sutra takes up for discussion a text which itself does not mention the characteristics of Brahman, but the text prior to it

does. satfasacorrhpareray il <2

anfa: Light acafwaraa on account of the mention of feet.

24. (The word) ‘light’ (is Brahman) on account of the mention of feet (in a complimentary passage).

“‘Now that light which shines above this heaven. beyond all,... Let a man meditate on this’’ etc. (Chh. 8. 13. 7). Here the question is whether the meditation is to be on the light as such or on

4.1.25] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 57

Brahmas. The Sutra says that ‘light’ here does not mean physical light which helps vision, such as the sun, but Bralanuan, because feet (quarters) are men- tioned in a preceding text: ‘This much is Its glory, greater than this is the Purusha. One foot of It is all beings while Its (remaining) three feet are immoital in heaven’ (Chh. 8. 12. 6). The Brahman that hes been so described in this passage is recog- nized in the one first quoted, where ‘light’ occurs, vecause there alsu it is said to be connected with ‘heaven’. Brahman is the subject matter of not only the previous texts, but also of the subsequent texts; for in the section immediately following that which contains the passage under discussion (i.e. in Chh. 3.14) Brahman is also the rain topic. It is there- fore but reasonable to say ‘that the intervening section (Chh. 3. 18) also deals with Brahman. Hence ‘light’ here means Brahman. The word ‘light’ can be used for Brahman, which manifests the world even as light manifests objects. The mention of limiting adjuncts with respect to Brahman, denoted by the word ‘light’ is only for the sake of meditation.

oraisirnarafa 3a, a, aa Aatscorfrrara, aur fe estar 34 tl

xisfraiang The metre (Gayatri) being mentioned 4 is nut fa aq if it be said 4 no ain that way SAsqufaney the application of the mind has been inculcated aw fe for so @#7q it is seen (in other texts).

25. If it be said (that Brahman is) not (referred to) on account of the metre (Gayatri) being mentioned; (we reply) no, because in that way (i.e. by means of the metre), the application of the mind (on Brahman) has been inculcated; for so (z.e. through the help of the modifications of Brahman) it is seen (in other texts).

An objection is raised that in the text ‘One foot of It is all beings’’, Brahman is not referred to, but the metre Gayatri, for the first paragraph of the preceding section of the same Upanishad begins with, “‘Gayatri is everything, whatever here exists,”’ etc. Therefore the feét referred to in the text cited in the last Sutra refer to this metre and not to Brahman. In reply it is said: Not so; for the text, ‘‘Gayatri is all this’? etc., teaches that one should meditate upon the Brahman which is con- nected with this metre, because Brahman, being the cause of everything, is connected with that Gayatri also, and it is that Brahman which is to be meditated upon. This interpretation would be in keeping with the other texts in the same section, e.g. ‘That which is that Brahman’? (Chh. 3. 12. 7) and also with ‘‘All this indeed is Brahman’’ (Chh. 38, 14. 1), where Brahman is the chief topic. Meditation on Brahman through Its modifications or effects is seen in other texts also. ‘Him the Bahvrichas meditate upon in the great hymn’”’ etc. (Ait. Ar, 3. 2. 3. 12).

1.1.27] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 59

Therefore Brahman is meatit here, and not the metre Gayatri.

qenfarrgsrqaeMaaearany it REN

yelfeqeacen The representation of beings ete. as feet 390%: is possible @ also way thus.

26. Thus also (we have to conclude, viz. that Brahman is the topic of the previous passage, where Gayatri cccurs) because (thus only) the representation of the beings etc. as the feet (of Gayatri) 1s. possible.

The beings, earth, body, and heart can be feet only of Brahman and not of Gayatri, the metre— a mere collection of syllables. See Ch. 3. 12. 2-4.. So by Gayatri is here meant Brahman as connected with the metre Gayatri. It is this Brahman sp particularized by Gayatri that is said to be the self of all in the text, ‘‘Gayatri is everything’’ etc. This same Brahman is again recognised as ‘light’ in

saqnaareafa Aa, a, THafeRAcafacta RON

suena On account of the difference in speci- fication 4 not sf 44 if it be said 4 no swafaq vit in either (description) wfattwa because there is no contradiction.

27. If it be said (that Brahman of the Gayatri passage cannot be recognized.

in the passage dealing with ‘light’), on account of difference in specification, (we reply) no, there being no contradiction im either (description to such a recognition).

In the Gayatri passage heaven is specified as the abode of Brahman, while in the other, Brahman is described as existing above heaven. How then can it be said that one and the same Brahman is referred to in both the passages? It can; there is no contradiction here, even as when we say, with reference to a bird perching on the top of a tree, that it is perching on the tree, or that it is above the tree. The difference in the case-ending of the word fga is no contradiction, since the locative case is often used in scriptural passages to express, secondarily, the meaning of the ablative.

Therefore the word ‘light’ has to be understood as Brahman.

ATMEAATATATA tl RC tl

wg: Prana au (like) that wm being so compre- hended (from the texts).

28. Prana is Brahman, it being so comprehended (from the purport of the texts).

In the previous topic the fact that Brahman’s three feet (quarters) were spoken of in an earlier

1.1.28] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 6L

text as being in heaven helped us to recognize that the same Brahman is spoken cf as the light above heaven. The-connecction with heaven helped us to this recognition. Now another text is taken up for discussion, in which there is no such decisive factor.

In the Kaushitaki Upanishad there occurs the following conversation between Indra and Pratar- dana, in which the iatter says to Indra: ‘You yourself choose for me that boon which you deem most beneficial to man.’’ Indra said, ‘‘Know me only, that is what I deem most beneficial to man.

I am Prana, the intelligent self (Prajnatman), meditate on me as life, as immortality.... And that Prana is indeed the intelligent self, blessed, undecaying, immortal’? (Kau. 8. 1-8). The question is raised whether these passages refer to the god Indra, or the individual self, or the vital force, or Brahman. The decision is that as the characteristics of Brahman are more in evidence in these passages. than those of the god Indra, individual soul, or the vital force (Prana), therefore Brahman is referred to in these passages; hence Prana here means. Brahman. The characteristics of Brahman referred to are: (1) Indra says in reply to Pratardana’s request for that which is most beneficial to man, ‘“‘“Know me, I am Prana’’ etc., and since Brahman alone is most beneficial to man, Indra’s answer refers. to Brahman. (2) Prana is spoken of as blessed, undecaying, immortal, which can be true only of Brahman. (8) The knowledge of this Prana is also

‘62 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.1.28

said to absolve one from all sins: ‘‘He who knows me thus, by no deed of his is his achievement harmed, neither by matricide nor by patricide...,”’

a qTeECrenaniata Bq, weqenaraenga eeAT I RE Il |

a Not am; the speaker’s wailvemq on account of the instruction about himself sfa 4q if it be said weaya-weaa-yat abundance of reference to the Inner Self f€ because faa in this.

29. If it be said that (Brahman is) not (referred to in these passages) on account of the speaker’s instruction about himself; (we reply not so), because there is abundance of reference to the Inner Self in this (chapter).

An objection is raised that the word ‘Prana’, cannot as stated in the last Sutra, refer to Brahman, since the speaker Indra describes himself by the word ‘Prana’ in, “Sl am Prana’ etc. But as in this conversation there are profuse references, as already pointed out in Sutra 28, to the Inner Self or Brahman, ‘Prana’ here must be taken as Brahman. And Indra’s describing himself as Prana is apt, since he identifies himself with Brahman in that instruc- tion, as did the Sage Vamadeva.

1.1.81] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 63

SINGAEEM FIM IHATTA Il Bo I

mraz Through realization of the Truth con- firmed by the scriptures q but seq: instruction aTazaaq like Vamadeva.

20. But (Indra’s) instruction (to Pratardana is justified) by his realization of the Truth confirmed by the scriptures (viz. that he is Brahman), as did (the sage) Vamadeva.

Rishi Vamadeva having realized Brahman said “I was Manu, and the sun,’ etc., which is justified by the passage: ‘‘Whichsoever of the gods knew It (Brahman) became That”’ (Brih. 1. 4. 10). _Indra’s instruction also is like that. Having realized the truth, ‘‘You art That’’, declared by the scriptures, he identifies himself in the instruction with the Supreme Brahman.

saqemrnfegiafa Aa, 4, sararaferara, srferacata, FE STEIN Be Ut

Hagemufayiqg On account of the characteristics of the individual soul and the vital energy 4 not sfa Sq if it be said 4 not so suet-afaenq because it would enjoin threefold meditation wifsaamq on account of Prana being accepted (elsewhere in the sense of Brahman) <€ here adtmaq because words denoting Brahman are mentioned with reference to Prana.

31. If it be said that (Brahman) is not referred to on account of the character- istics of the individual soul and the vital force (being mentioned), (we say) not so, because (such an interpretation) would enjoin threefold meditation (Updasana); because Prana has been accepted (else- where in the sense of Brahman); and be- cause here also (words denoting Brahman) are mentioned with reference to Prana. (Hence it is to be understood to mean

Brahman).

The psasages under discussion might as well refer to the individual soul and the vital force, for their characteristics also are found: ‘‘One should know the speaker and not inquire into speech”? (Kau. 3. 8), ‘‘Prana, laying hold of this body, makes it rise up’? (Kau. 3. 8). The Sutra refutes such a view and says that Brahman alone is referred to by ‘Prana’; for the above interpretation would involve a threefold Upasana, viz. of the individual soul, of the chief vital force, and of Brahman, which is against the accepted rules of scriptural interpretation. No single passage can be made to yield three different meditations in this way by splitting it up. More- over in the beginning we have, “‘Know me only”’, followed by, ‘I am Prana’’, and in the end again we have, “‘And that Prana indeed is the intelligent self, blessed, undecaying, immortal’’, which shows

1.1.81] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 65

that the sume topic is kept up throughout. Therefore ‘Prana’ must be taken in the sense of Brahman and that on the ground that Its characteristics are found iu this passage which have already been referred to in Sutra 1. 1. 28. This meaning of ‘Prana’ is found in other scriptural passages, and we are justified in taking it in that sense here, since words denoting Brahman are mentioned with reference to ‘Prana’.


CHAPTER I
---------

[Section II]

In the latter part of section 1, certain scriptural terms generally used in a different sense have been shown through reasoning to refer to Brahman, and consequently certain passages of the scriptures of doubtful sense, but containing clear characteristics of Brahman, have been shown to refer to Brahman. Now in this and the next section some more passages of doubtful import, especially with no clear mention of the characteristics of Brahman in them, are taken up for discussion.

is Brahman.

aan AfTatasarey tl & i

waa Throughout (the scriptures) wfayivemq be- cause there is taught (the Brahman which is) well known., 1. (That which consists of the mind [Manomaya]| is Brahman) because there is taught (in this text) (that Brahman which is) well known (as the cause of the universe) throughout (the scriptures).

Sutras 1-8 show that the Being who consists of the mind (Manomaya) and is prescribed as the object

1.2.2] ‘BRAHMA-SUTRAS 67

of Upasana or meditation in the text, “All this indeed is Brahman, for it has its beginning, end, and sub- sistence in Its; so let a man meditate with a calm mind.... He who consists of the mind, whose body is Prana (the subtle body)’’ etc. (Chh. 8. 14. 1-2) is Brahman and not the individual soul. Why? Because the text begins with, ‘‘All this is Brahman’’, wherein that Brahman which is treated as the cause of the universe in all scriptural texts is described. Since the beginning refers to Brahman, it is but pioper that the later sentence where ‘‘He who consists of the mind’’ occurs, should also refer to Brahman as distinguished by certain qualities; otherwise there would arise the inconsistency of suddenly introducing a new subject and dropping the previous one. More- over the text here speaks of Updasana, meditation, and as such it is but apt that Brahman which is described in all other texts as an object of meditation is also taught here and not the individual soul which is nowhere prescribed as such. Moreover, one can become calm as the text asks only by meditating on Brahman which is bereft of all anger, hatred, etc.

fara ferarportaaeaer tt 2 Il

faafea-qaiq7t: Because qualities desired to be expressed are befitting @ moreover.

2. Moreover the qualities desired to be expressed are befitting (only in the case of Brahman; and so the passage refers to Brahman).

He who consists of the mind, whose body is

Prana (the subtle body), whose form is light, resolve is true, whose nature is like that of ether (omnipresent and invisible)’’, ete. (Chh. 3. 14. 2)—the qualities mentioned in this text as topics of medita- tion are possible in the case of Brahman alone. Therefore the conclusion is that such a qualified Brahman alone is to be meditated upon.

AITWIAET FT MAT: 3

wauqt: Because ( they ) are not appropriate § on the other hand 4 is not Wz: the individual soul.

38. On the other hand the individual soul is not (referred to by the text) because these qualities are not appropriate (to it).

HART STMT | 8 aq Object HF agent Bg@mq on account of the mention 4 and.:

4. And on account of the mention of the attainer and the object attained (“He

who consists of the mind” refers to Brah- man and not to the individual soul).

In the same chapter of the Chhandogya Upani- shad there occurs the passage, ‘‘When J shall have departed from hence, I shall attain Him” (3. 14. 4), where ‘Him’. refers to ‘‘Who consists of the mind”’, the object of meditation spoken of in the earlier

1.2.6] 3RAHMA-SUTRAS 69

passage. Therefore He is necessarily different from the person whe meditates, the individual soul referred to in the above text by the pronoun ‘I’.

wea tartare tt % I

5. Because of the difference (indicat- ed by the case-endings) of the words.

In the Satapatha Brahmana, where the same idea is expressed in similar words, we have, ‘‘As is a gran of rice, or a grain of barley... so is that golden Being in the self’? (10. 6. 8. 2), where the individual soul and ‘the self consisting of the mind’ are clearly described as two different entities, for “the self consisting of the mind’—which is denoted by a word in the nominative case—is described as being in the individual self, the word denoting it being ip the locative case. Therefore it is clear that the individual self 1s not referred to in the text under

discussion. CIAaT | & Il

@@: From the Smriti § also.

6. From the Smriti also (we learn that the individual soul is different from the one referred to in the text under dis- cussion).

The Smriti referred to is, ‘The Lord, O Arjuna, is seated in the hearts of all beings’’ etc. (Gita 18. 61}. We must not forget, however, that &ccording to Advaita Vedanta this difference is only imaginary and

not real. The difference exists only so long as ignorance lasts, and the full import of the text ‘‘You art That’? has not been realized.

sane asada afa aq, a, frar- BCMA SHAT | 9 Il

wale Because of the smallness of the abcde — aeTgeUqy on account of its being designated as such (i. e- small) 4 also 4 not sfa 4q if it be said 4 not so faarazarqa for the sake of contemplation U4 so ataaq like the ether 4 and.

7. If it be said that (the passage does) not (refer to Brahman) because of the smallness of the abode (referred to, viz. the heart) and also on account of its being designated as such (1.e. as minute); (we say,) not so, (because Brahman has been so characterized) for the sake of comtemplation and because the case is similar to that of the ether.

‘“He is my self within the heart, smaller than a grain of rice, smaller than a grain of barley’’ etc. (Chh. 8. 14. 8). This text occurs in the same section in which we also find ‘“‘the self consisting of the mind’’. The objection is raised that since these limitations are apt not in the case of Brahman but of the individual soul, it is the latter that is referred to by ‘“‘the self consisting of the mind’’. The Sutra

1.2.8] _ BRAHMA-SUTRAS 7

refuies it and scys that Brahman here is thus characterized. for the convenience of contemplation, as otherwise it is difficult to meditate on the all- pervading Brahman. This does not mar Its omni- presence, as these limitations are merely imagined in Brahman and are not real. The case is analogous to that of the ether in the eye of the needle, which is spoken of as limited and small, whereas in fact it is all-pervading.

aanaorfatefa Bq, a, TOMA | < tt

aaianiiz: That it has experience (of pleasure and’ pain) sfa 4q if it be said 4 not so 4ienq because of the difference in nature.

8. If it be said that (being connected with the hearts of all individual souls on account of Its omnipresence, It would also) have experience (of pleasure and pain), (we say,) not so, because of the difference in the nature (of the two).

The mere fact that Brahman is all-pervading and connected with the hearts of all individual souls, and is also intelligent like them, does not make It subject to pleasure and pain. For the individual soul is an agent, the doer of good and bad deeds, and therefore experiences pleasure and pain, while Brahman is not an agent, and therefore does not experience pleasure and-pain. A fallacious argument is often put forward that because Brahman and the

72. BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.2.8

individual soul are in reality identical, therefore the former is also subject to the pleasure and pain experienced by the latter. But then this identity only refutes the experience of pleasure and pain even by the individual soul as being due to ignorance; for in reality there is neither the individual soul nor pleasure and pain. Therefore the argument of identity cannot be turned the other way to make even the ever pure Brahman subject to evil.

In the last topic the experience of pleasure and pain in Brahman is denied. Here, in this topic, the fact that Brahman is not an agent is established— which is its connection with the previous topic.

AAT ALIATARTTT |] & Il wa The eater Baas UA because the movable and immovable (i.e. the whole universe) is taken (as his food).

9. The eater (is Brahman), because both the movable and immovable (i.e. the entire universe) is taken (as his food).

‘“Who thus knows where He is, to whom the Braéhmanas and Kshatriyas are (as it were) but food and death itself a condiment’’ (Kath. 1. 2. 25)? This passage says that there is some eater. Who is this eater referred to by ‘He’? Is it the fire referred to in another text as eater: ‘‘Soma indeed is food, and fire the eater’’ (Brih. 1. 4. 6); or is it the individ-

1.2.10] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 73

ual soul referred t> as eater in, ‘‘One of them eats the sweet fruit’? (Mu. 8. 1. 1). This Sutra says it 1s neither, but the Supreme Lord, for the text says that in Him the whole of creation, movable and immvuvable, is reabsorbed. The fact that death, which destroys everything else, is swallowed up as a condiment, shows that the entire creation is referred to as His food. The Brahmanas and Keshatriyas are mentioned as mere examples, since they are the foremost of created beings. The eater of such a stupendous thing can be Brahman alone and none else.

TATE || Lo I wacua From the context 4 and.

10. And because (Brahman) is the subject of the discussion.

In an earlier text Nachiketas asks Yama:

Tell me of that which you see as neither good nor

bad action, as ncither effect nor -cause, as neither past nor future’? (Kath. 1. 2. 14). In this text Brahman is inquired into and Yama answers: ‘“‘l will tell you in brief—it is Aum’? (Kath. 1. 2. 15). Further on he says, “The Self is neither born nor does it die’’ (Ibid. 1. 2. 18), and finally concludes with the passage in which the eater is mentioned. All this clearly shows that Brahman is the topic, and therefore the ‘eater’ is Brahman. It also follows from the peculiar characteristic, viz. the difficulty

to cognize It, which is referred to in the text under discussion.

An objection may be raised on the ground that the scripture itself in another place denies that Brahman is the ‘eater’: ‘The other (Brahman) looks on without eating’’ (Mu. 8.1.1). But ‘eating’ in this text refers to the experience of pleasure and pain, while in the text under discussion it means the reabsorption of the universe at the time of dissolution, which the scriptures attribute to Brahman alone.

of the heart are the individual soul and Brahman.

ayer ofrsrarearat fe, agetara tl 22 tl

yet cavity (of the heart ) afaet the two that have entered watt are the two selves (individual and Supreme) fe indeed aexatq because it is so seen.

11. The two that have entered into the cavity (of the heart) are indeed the individual self and the Supreme Self, because it is so seen.

In the Katha Upanishad there occurs the passage, ‘Having entered the cavity of the heart, the two enjoy the reward of their works, in the body” (1. 3. 1). The question is whether the couple referred to are the individual soul and Brahman, or the individual soul and intellect (Buddhi). The opponent, follow- ing the argument of the previous topic, says it is

1.2.12] PRAHMA-SUTRAS 75

the latter. In th last topic the nearness of the word ‘death’ helped us to interpret ‘Brahmana’ and ‘Kshatriya’ as typical of the whole phenomenal world, similarly the nearness of the word ‘enjoy’ would make the two in the text refer to limited things like the individual soul and intellect. The Sutra refutes this and says that the couple referred to are the individual.oul and Brahman, for numerals denote things of the same class. When a cow is brought to us and we say, ‘‘Bring another’’, it means another cow. So ii with an intelligent self, the individual soul, another is said to enter the cavity of the heart, it must refer tc another of the same class, 1.€. to another sentient being, and not to the intellect (Buddhi), which is insentient. The fact that both are said to enjoy the fruits of actions, which cannot apply to the Highest Brahman, is thus explained: Sometimes the characteristics of one in a group are indirectly applied to the whole group, as when we say, The men with an umbrella’’, where only one has an umbrella and not the whole group. So here also, though it is only one that is enjoying the fruits of actions, both are so spoken off.

Feraterorrar 1 82 tl faarrarg From the specification @ and. 12. And from the (distinctive) quali- ties (of the two mentioned in subsequent texts).

The texts subsequent to the one under discussion

mention the characteristics of the two that have entered the cavity of the heart, which show that these are the individual soul and Brahman. ‘‘Know that the soul is the charioteer’’ etc. (Kath. 1. 3. 8) and ‘He attains the end of the journey, that supreme state of Vishnu’’ (Ibid. 1. 3. 9), where the two are mentioned as the attainer and the goal attained, 4.€. as the Jiva and Brahman. In a previous passage also the two are spoken of as the meditator and the object of meditation. ‘‘The sage relinquishes joy and sorrow, having realized by meditation... that effulgent One... seated in the heart’? (Kath.

In the last topic the reference to ‘two’ occuring at the beginning of the text discussed, was inter- preted to denote two of the same class, t.e. two sentient beings, and the entrance into the cavity of the heart, mentioned later on, was interpreted accordingly. The same line of argument should be used, says the opponent, to interpret the text of this topic. That is, the person in the eye ought to be taken as a reflection in the eye, as it occurs at the beginning of the text, and the subsequent mention of immortality, fearlessness, etc. ought to be ex- explained away, as praise or otherwise. The inverse method, i.e. taking these words to refer to Brahman and thus fixing the person in the eye to be Brahman, should not be followed. In this way the opponent

1.2.14] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 7

wants to show thet the argument of the previous one is defective, for it will launch us into difficulties with respect to other texts of the Sruti.

BraT TATA: |] 23 I

waz: Inside (the eye) 399%: on account of the appropriateness of (attributes).

13. (The person) inside (the eye is Rrahinan) on account of (the attributes meitioned therein) being appropriate (only to Brahman).

‘This person that is seen in the eye is the self. This is immortal and fearless; this is Brahman’”’ (Chh. 4. 15. 1). The question is whether the person referred to here is the reflection of a person in the eye, or the individual soul, or the sun, which helps. sight, or Brahman. The Sutra says that this person in the eye is Brahman, because the qualities, ‘im- mortal’, ‘fearless’, etc., mentioned here with respect to that person can be true only of Brahman, and they cannot be otherwise explained away.

ENA oTGaTD | LS Il

wiaifeagemqd Because abode etc. (7. e. name and form) are attributed to it 4 and.

14. And because abode etc. (i.e. name and form) are attributed to It (Brahman) (by other scriptural texts also, for the sake: of contemplation).

7% BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.2.14

But, how can the all-pervading Brahman be in a limited space like the eye? The assignation of a definite locality to the all-pervading Brahman only serves the purpose of meditation (Upfasana). In other scriptural texts, the disc of the sun, the cavity of the heart, even the eye itself (Brih. 8. 7. 18) and similar pure spots have been prescribed as places for the contemplation of Brahman. So here it is pre- scribed that Brahman should be contemplated in the eye. Not only abode, but even name and form are attributed to Brahman for the purpose of meditation, as Brahman without attributes cannot be an object of contemplation. (Vide Chh. 1. 6. 6-7).

gafafrerhrarnas 4 1 24 Il

qafafye-sfireiiq On account of the reference (to Brahman) distinguished by bliss @ @ and,

15. And on account of the reference (in the passage to Brahman) distinguished by bliss (mentioned at the beginning of the Prakarana).

“The vital energy is Brahman, bliss is Brahman, ‘the ether is Brahman’’ (Chh. 4. 10. 5)—so taught the fires to Upakosala Kamalayana about Brahman, and this same Brahman is further elucidated by his teacher as ‘the person in the eye’’.

syata farce krarara tt &é

ya suyfawen-afa The way of those who have realized

1.2.17) SRAHMA-SUTRAS 79

the Truth of the Upanishads wfrernq on account of

the statement 7 also.

16. Also on account of the statement of the way (after death) of those who have known the Truth of the Upanishads (2.e. knowers of Brahman) (with reference to the knower of the person in the eye).

The Devayana path or the path of the gods, by which a knower of Brahman travels after aeath and which is described in the Prasna Upanishad 1.10 and other scriptural texts, is referred to here. Since the knower of ‘‘the person in the eye’’ also goes by this path after death, and since it is known from scriptures that none other except the knower of Brahman goes by this paih after death, ‘‘the person in the eve’? must be Brahman.

ATTCTATSH TAT AAT: | LO il

waafea: Not existing always Wawa on account of the impossibility 4 and 4 not tat: any other.

17. (The person in the eye is the Supreme Self) and not any other (i.e. individual soul etc.) as these do not exist always; and on account of the impossi- bility (of the qualities of the person in the eye being attributed to any of these).

The reflection in the eye, for example, does not exist always, nor can the qualities like immortality,

fearlesness, etc., be appropriately ascribed to this reflection. So no other self except the Supreme Self is here spoken of as the person in the eye.

In the last topic, while interpreting the person in the eye as Brahman it has been taken for granted that the eye is prescribed in Brih. 3. 7. 18 as an abode of Brahman for contemplation, and that therefore here also the eye is prescribed as an abode. The present topic takes up for discussion this text of Brihadaranyaka and establishes the conclusion that was taken for granted in the last topic.

ada, afrearieg asteagzana il Re I

wate The Ruler within weearey in the gods ete. aqA-AGEMWG on account of Its qualities being men- tioned.

18. The Ruler within of the gods and so on (is Brahman) on account of the qualities of that (Brahman) being men- tioned.

‘Do you know the Internal Ruler’’ ete. (Brih, 8. 7. 1); and again, ‘‘He who inhabits the earth, but is within it, whom the earth does not know,... is the Internal Ruler, your own immortal self?’ (Brih. 8. 7. 8). The ‘Internal Ruler’? spoken of here is Brahman and not the individual soul endowed with Siddhis (powers) or the presiding deity, or anything else, for the characteristics of Brahman

1.2.20] | BRAHMA-SIUTRAS sr

are mentioned in the concluding part of the text cited, wherein the Ruler is spoken of as identical with the individual soul and immortal, which can be true only of Brahman. He is also described in this section as being all-pervading, since he is inside and the Ruler within of evervthing, viz. the earth, the sun, water, fire, sky, the ether, the senses, eic., and this also can be true only of Braliman.

a @ tala, AaSAASTNG tt LE Il

a Neither @ and faq that which is mentioned in the (Saénkhya) Smriti vaa wé-wfarama because attributes contrary to its nature are mentioned.

19. And neither is (the Ruler within): that which is talked of in (Sankhya) Smriti (17.e. Pradhana), because attributes. contrary to its nature are mentioned (here).

The Pradhana is not this “‘Internal Ruler’’, as. the attributes: ‘He is the immortal’’; ‘Sunseen but secing, unheard but hearing,’’ etc. (Brih. 3. 7. 28),. do not hold true of the non-iutelligent Pradhana.

mrdiwa, saasty fe Atanas 1 Ro Ul

mz: The individual soul 4 also (4 not ) 3¥a- wfy. (the followers of) both (the recensions—K&anwa and Madhyandina) fe for #@4 as different TW this (the Jiva) wad read.

20. Also the individual soul (is not the Ruler within), for this is read as different (from the Internal Ruler) by the followers of both (the recensions, viz. the Kanwa and Madhyandina Sakhas of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad).

The negative ‘not’ is to be supplied from the last Sutra.

He who dwells in knowledge”? etc.—says Brih.

3. 7. 22, Kanwa reading, where ‘knowledge’ stands for the individual soul, for it consists of knowledge. ‘‘He who dwells in the self’’—is the Madhyandina reading of the same passage, where ‘self’? stands for the individual soul. These quotations make it clear that in either reading the individual soul is spoken of as different from the ‘Internal Ruler’’, for it is the ruler of the individual soul also.

Here again we should not forget that the differ- ence of the Internal Ruler, the Supreme Lord, and the individual soul is merely the product of Nescience. There is only one Self within, for two selves are not possible. But owing to limiting adjuncts the one Self is treated as if It were two.

In the last topic the ruler within was interpreted as the Supreme Lord and not the Pradhana, for qualities like, ‘seeing’, ‘hearing’, etc., which are con- trary to the nature of the Pradhana, were present.

4.2.22] PRAHMA-SUTRAS 83

Now ceitain texts which do not mention such qualities so as to exc.iude the Pradhana are taken up for discussion.

ageacariaayorant “aati: Re tt

wemgeate-qua: Posscssor of qualities like invisi- bility ete. vata: on account of the qualities being mentioned.

21. The possessor of qualities like invisibility etc. (is Brahman) on account of (Its) characteristics being mentioned.

“That which cannot be seen nor seized, which is without origin... eternal, all-pervading, omni- present, extremely subtle..., the source of all beings, which the wise behold’? (Mu. 1. 1. 6). The Being which is the source of all beings is not the Pradhana but Brahman, for qualities like ‘‘He is all-knowing, all perceiving’? (Mu. 1. 1. 9) are true only of Brahman and not of the Pradhana, which is non-intelligent. Obviously it cannot refer to the individual soul as it is limited.

PANUASATaIMTAT RAT 22 Il

fanea ee-quenral On accourt of the mention of characteristic qualities and differences 4 not sav the other two.

22. The other two (viz. the individual soul and.the Pradhana) are not (referred to in the passage), because the characteristics of Brahman and the difference (of the

Being which is the source of all beings from the individual soul and the Pradhana) are mentioned.

“That heavenly person is without body, com- prises the external and the internal, is birthless, with- out the vital force and without mind, pure, higher than the high Imperishable”’ (Mu. 2. 1. 2). Epithets like ‘heavenly’, ‘birthless’, ‘pure’, etc. apply to Brahman and not the individual soul, which considers itself limited, impure, corporeal, etc. ‘‘Higher than the high Imperishable (Pradhina)’’ shows that the source of all beings spoken of in the last Sutra is not the Pradhana but something different from it.

SAAATATA I 3 Ul

eq-gyqaqigiq Form being mentioned @ also.

23. Also because (its) form is men- tioned (the passage under discussion refers to Brahman).

Subsequent to the text quoted in the previous Sutra we have the following text, ‘‘The Person indeed is all this—sacrifice, knowledge, etc.’’ (Mu. 2. 1. 10} which shows that “‘the source of all beings’’ referred to in the text under discussion, is none other than the Supreme Lord or Brahman, because it is the self of all beings.

In the last topic a general quality like invisibility

1224) PRAHMA-SUTRAS 85

equally applicable to Brahman and the Pradhana was interpreted to refer to Brahman taking into consid- eration qualities like all-knuwingness etc. mentioned later on in the section. Following this argument the objector takes some t2xts for discussion and insists that the Vaisvanara referred to in them must be the ordinary fire in view of specifications like ‘‘the sup- port of sacrifice’? mentioned later on.

Parat: qrarcormedfaaarsg tl Ws I

aya: Vaisvanara aang we-faima because of the qualifying adjuncts to the common words (Vaisva- nara and self ).

24, Vaisvanara (is Brahman), be- cause of the qualifying adjuncts to the common words (‘Vaisvanara’ and ‘Self’).

‘But he who worships this Vaisvanara Self extending from heaven to the earth as identical with his own self, eats food in all beings, in all selves; of that Vaisvanara self Sutejas (heaven) is the head, the sun the eye’’, etc. (Chh. 5. 18, 1-2). Now what is this Vaisvanara Self? ‘Vaisvanara’ generally means fire, the presiding deity of fire and the gastric fire. ‘Self? refers to both the individual soul and the Supreme Self. Which of these is referred to in the passage? Whatever be the ordinary meaning of these two words, the Sutra says that here the Supreme Self is referred to, on account of the qualifying adjuncts to these words. The adjuncts are:

Heaven is the head of this Vaisvanara Self, the sun its eyes, etc., and this is possible only in the case of the Supreme Self. Again the result of meditation on this Vaisvanara Self having the parts stated is the attainment of all desires, and freedom from all sin. (Vide Chh. 5. 24. 3). This also can be true if the Highest Self is meant. Moreover the chapter begins with the inquiry, ‘‘What is our Self? What is Brahman?’’—where the word ‘Brahman’ is used in its primary sense, and so it is proper to think that the whole chapter delineates Brahman.

cada carafe 11 2% tt

@qamd Described in the Smriti 9444 indicatory mark @!q must be #fa because.

25. Because that (cosmic form of the Supreme Lord) which is deseribed in the Smriti must be an indicatory mark (from which we arrive at the meaning of this Sruti text under discussion).

The Smritis are interpretations of Sruti texts. So where a doubt arises as to the meaning of a Sruti the former may be consulted to throw light on the subject. The Smriti describes the cosmic form of the Supreme Lord as, ‘‘He whose mouth is fire, whose head is heaven,... whose ears are the regions— salutation to Him, whose body is the universe’’, which agrees with the description in the text under

1.2.26] | DRAHMA-SUTRAS 87

discussion. Hence we have to conclude that the Highest Lord is referred to in the text.

meaifecatsea: sfagiara afa aa, a, aur gL oem, avara, Fela wana t= i

wwifey: Because of the word and other reasons wa: inside yfawiata on account of (its) existing 4 and a not efa aq if it be said 4 not so am as such 24” vemq on account of the instruction to conceive it Wawa being impossible yaa as person Wf also vaq him 4 also wHae (they) describe.

26. If it be said that (Vaisvanara) is not (Brahman) because of the word (‘Vaisvanara’, which has a definite mean- ing, viz. gastric fire) and other reasons, and on account of its existing inside (which is true of gastric fire), (we say) not so, because there is the instruction to con- ceive (Brahman) as such (as the gastric fire), because it is impossible (for the gastric fire to have the heaven ete. for its head and other limbs) and also because (the Vajasaneyins) describe him (Vaisva- nara) as a person (which the gastric fire is not).

Objection: The ordinary meaning of ‘Vaisva- nara’ is fire and the Sruti also says that it is seated

‘88 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.2.26

inside: ‘“‘He who knows this Vaisvanara abiding ‘within man”? (Sat. Br. 10. 6. 1. 11), which applies to the gastric fire only. Hence it alone, and not ‘Brahman, is referred to in the text under discussion.

The Sutra refutes this objection firstly because the scripture here teaches the worship of Brahman ‘in the gastric fire by way of meditation (Upasana), even as in the passage, ‘‘Let a man meditate on the mind as Brahman’? (Chh. 8. 18. 1). Secondly because the gastric fire cannot have heaven for its head, and so on. Thirdly because Vaisvanara 1s wonceived as a person by the Vajasaneyins: ‘‘This Agni Vaisvanara is a person’? etc. (Sat. Br. 10. 6. 1. 11). Hence ‘Vaisvanara’ here refers to Brahman, which is all-pervading and can also be conceived of as a person.

Ta OT A BAT Wa A I 29 Il

wa ua For the same reason @ (is) not @aat deity ya element 7 and.

27. For the same reason (Vaisva- nara) is not the deity (fire) or the element (fire).

For the same reason—as stated in the previous

Sutra. arengeafadd afata: ee ara Directly wf even sfatie no contradiction aifafa: (so says) Jaimini.

1.2.30] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 89

28. Even (if by ‘Vaisvanara’ Brah- man is) directly (taken as the object of worship), there is no contradiction; (so says) Jaimini.

In the last Sutra it was explained that medita- tion on Brahman in the gastric fire, taking it as a symbol, was taught. This Sutra says that ‘Vaisva- nara’ can be taken directly to mean Brahman as an object of contemplation, for ‘Vaisvanara’ is the ‘same as Visvanara, which means the universal man,.€. the all-pervading Brahman Itself.

aifizoaafeargsaceen: |) 28 Ht

whan: On account of manifestation «fa so WAT: (says) Asmarathya:

29. On account of manifestation—so says Asmarathya.

The reference to Vaisvanara in the text under discussion as extending from heavens to the earth is explained here. Even though the Lord is all-pervad- ing, yet He specially manifests Himself as extending from heaven to the earth for the sake of the devotees.

AJSIAA AT: |] Bo Il wqqa: For the purpose of constant remembrance

melt: (so says) Badari.

30. For the purpose of constant remembrance—so says Badari.

The Highest Lord may be called ‘‘measured by a span’? (to render.the term ‘Pradesamatra’ differently), because He is remembered through the mind, which is seated in the heart, and the heart is of the size of a span.

arpafefa sfafa:, aut fe astafa 3k i

aga: Because of imaginary identity <fa so a fafa: (says) Jaimini aafs for so zafa declares (the Sruti).

81. Because of imaginary identity (the Supreme Lord may be called span long), so says Jaimini; for so (the Sruti) declares.

Sampat Upasana is a kind of meditation in which something is imagined as identical with something else on account of some kind of similarity or likeness. As, for example, when the cosmic being (Purusha) is worshipped through the identification of His different limbs with the different parts of the worshipper’s body from the top of the head to the chin. The head of the worshipper is heaven, the eyes the sun and the moon, and so on. In this meditation of the cosmic Person He is limited to the size of a span, the distance from the top of the head to the chin. Therefore, says Jaimini, in the text under discus- sion, the Supreme Lord is regarded as of the size of a span.

1.2.32] - BRAHMA-SUTRAS 91

amare arafenz tl 32 I

wiaafet Teach @ morcover tq this Waa in this.

82. Moreover (the Jabhalas) teach that this (Supreme Lord is to be meditated upon) in this (space between the head and the chin).

See Jéhala Upanishad 1.

Sutras 27—382 justify the reference to the Supreme Lord by the term ‘Pridesamatra’ ‘‘as extending from heaven to the earth’’, or ‘Sas measured by a span’’).


CHAPTER I
---------

[Section III]

In the last section texts of doubtful import were interpreted to refer to Brahman, and in so doing the fact that Brahman is the one object of all devout Meditations helped us much. In this section some more texts of doubtful import are taken up for dis- cussion and are interpreted to refer to Brahman, and in this interpretation the fact that Brahman is the one object of knowledge is taken advantage of.

etc. 1s Brahman.

In the last topie of the last section the word “Vaisvanara’, which usually means the gastric fire, was interpreted as Brahman, in view of the words, “Its head is heaven’, occurring at the end of the text. Following this argument the opponent takes up for discussion a text where the word ‘immortal’ should refer to the Pradhana and not to Brahman, on account of the word ‘bridge’ which occurs at the end of the text. <A bridge connects with something beyond, and as there can be nothing beyond Brahman, the word ‘bridge’ excludes Brahman, and so ‘immortal’ refers not to Brahman but to the

Pradhana.

1.3.1] - BRAHMA-SUTRAS ag

PTAA SVU & tl

q-y wife-steay The resting-place of heaven,. earth, ete. @-w%@iq on account of the word ‘Self’.

1. The resting-place of heaven, earth,, ete. (is Brahman) on account of the word Sel? (or on account of the actual words of the Sruti) (designating this resting- place).

“In Him heaven, the earth, and the sky are woven, as also the mind with all the senses. Know that Self alene and leave off other talk! He is the bridge of Immortality’? (Mu. 2. 2. 5). He who is. spoken of as the abode, in whom the earth, heaven, etc. are woven is Brahman, on account of the term ‘Self’, which is appropriate only if Brahman is refer- red to in the text and not Pradhana or Sutratman. Or there are actual texts in which Brahman is spoken of as the abode by terms properly designating Brahman. For example: ‘‘All these creatures, my dear, have their root, their abode, and their rest in the being’? (Chh. 6. 8. 4). It may also mean Brahman because in the texts preceding and following this one, ic. in Mu. 2. 1. 10 and 2. 2. 11, Brahman is spoken of,. and so it is but proper to inier that It is also referred to in the intervening text, which is under discussion.

From the text cited above, where mention is made of an abode and that which abides, and also from ‘‘Brahman indeed is all this’? (Mu. 2. 2. 11) we are: not to take that Brahman is of manifold, variegated.

‘94 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.3.1

nature, like a tree consisting of leaves, branches, etc. This would lead us to Pantheism, and Advaita does not uphold it. So in order to remove the possibility of such a doubt the passage under discussion, says,

Know Him alone, the Self’’ i.e. know the Self alone

and not that which abides in it, which is merely a product of Nescience and has to be set aside as false.

FRTTATATM | 2 I

qa-37eq To be attained by the liberated ayenq because of the statement.

2. Because of the statement (in the scriptures) that that is to be attained by the liberated.

A further reason is given to show that Brahman is meant in the passage under discussion. It is the goal of the liberated. Vide Mu. 2. 2. 9; 3. 2. 8. Therefore it can be Brahman alone.

UTAH, tal=He-qry ll 3 Il a Not wqaa what is. inferred (Pradhana) aq- Wz owing to want of any term indicating it.

8. (The abode of heaven etc.) is not what is inferred (7.e. Pradhana), owing to want of any term indicating 1t.

The abode of heaven etc. cannot be the Pradhana, for there is no term indicative of 1t in the text, as we -have ‘Self? indicative of Brahman. There are no terms whatsoever referring to inert matter, but on the

1.3.6] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 95

other hand there are terms indicating intelligence: “Who knows ali, understands all’? etc. (Mu. 1.1.9).

ATTA || S il

yradq The living or individual soul #4 also (a4 not). |

4, (Nor) alse the individual soul.

The word ‘not’? has to be inferred irom the previ- ous Sutra.

Nor is it the individual soul, though it is an intelligent principle aud can therefore be denoted by the word ‘Self’; for it 1s impossible to conceive the individual soul as omniscient and as the resting-place of the whole universe.

ATA lt & I He-agemq On account of difference being men- tioned.

5. (Also) on account of difference being mentioned (between the individual soul and the abode of heaven etc.).

‘Know Him alone as the Self,’’? says the text under discussion, thereby differentiating the individ- ‘ual soul desirous of release and the abode of heaven etc. as the knower and the thing to be known.

TRL tl & Il 6. On account of the subject-matter.

The Upanishad begins with, ‘‘What is that: (Mu. 1. 1. 4) and concludes by saying, ‘‘The knower of Brahman becomes Brahman’’ (Mu. 8. 2. 9), which shows that the subject-matter of the whole Upanishad from beginning to end is Brahman, and therefore it is the same Brahman which is spoken of as the abode of heaven etc.

fuemearean 3 to tt

fafa-weamaiq On account of remaining unattached and eating 4 also.

7, Also on account of (the mention of two conditions:) remaining unattached and eating (which are the characteristics of the Supreme Self and the individual

self respectively).

‘Two birds, inseparable friends, cling to the same tree. One of them eats the sweet fruit, the other looks on without cating’? (Mu. 3. 1. 1). Here Brahman 1s described as the witness and the individ- ual soul as experiencing the fruits of good and evil actions and hence different from the other. This description, which distinguishes the two, can be apt only if the abode of heaven ete. is Brahman. Other- wise there will be no continuity of topic. Nor can we take this text as merely describing the nature of the individual soul, for the scriptures nowhere aim at describing the individual soul, which is known to

1.3.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 97

everyone as the azent, enjoyer, etc. Their aim is always to describe and establish Brahman which is not so known.

In the last section the uhbode of heaven etc. was interpreted as referring to Brahman on account of the word ‘Seif’ in the text The opponent now takes up for discussion another text, where the word ‘Self’ according to his view is used to denote Prana, the vital force, and not Brahman. See Chh. 7. 28 and 24. The following Sutra however says that here also it is Brahman and not Prana.

AT AMAT ATTSATS Ml < Hl yat The Bhuman ayaiziq-wia after or beyond the state of deep sleep, (here, the vital force ) sv7ema because of the teaching.

8. The Bhuman (is_ Brahman) because it 1s taught after the state of deep sleep (1.e. after Prana or the vital force, which alone functions even in that state).

In the seventh chapter of the Chhandogya Upa- nishad, Sanatkumara teaches Narada several truths. He begins with ‘name’ and goes higher and higher, till he teaches the highest truth, which is Bhuman. ‘“‘The Bhuman (infinite) is bliss.... The Bhuman you should seek to understand.... Where one sees

nothing else, hears nothing else, understands nothing else, that is the Bhuman’’ (Chh. 7. 28 and 7. 24. 1). The question is, what does this Bhuman refer to. The opponent holds that it is the vital force. He argues as follows: After Sanatkumdra finished teaching every truth from name up to the vital force, Narada asks him, “‘Is there anything higher than this??’—to which Sanatkumara answers, ‘‘Yes, there is,’’? and takes up the next higher truth. But after being taught about the vital force Narada does not ask whether there is any higher truth, and yet Sanat- kumara gives this dissertation on the Bhuman—which shows that this Bhuman is not different from the vital force taught already. Not only that, he calls the knower of the vital force an Ativadin (one who makes a statement surpassing previous statements), thereby showing that the vital force is the highest truth, and in accordance with this he further eluci- dates the truth as Bhuman.

This Sutra refutes this argument and says that Bhuman is Brahman, for though the Sutra calls the knower of vital force an Ativadin, yet it says, But he indeed is an Ativadin who is such through the realization of the Truth’? (Chh. 7.16.1), which clearly shows that it refers to something higher than the vital force, knowing which one becomes truly an Ativadin. Thus it is clear that a new topic about Brahman which is the highest Truth is begun, though Narada does not ask whether there is any truth higher than the vital force. Sanatkumara, in accordance with

1.8.10] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 99

Narada’s desire te be an Ativadin through Truth, now leads him bv a series of steps to the knowledge of the Bhuman, showing that this Bhuman is Brahman. Moreover, if the vital force, says the Sutra, were the Bhuman, then the Srut? would not give any informa- tion about it— as it does in Chh. 7. 24. 1 cited above -—beyond what it has ulready given in section 15.

WATATATS | & tl

wda-3aquq; Because the qualities ure appropriate 4 and.

9. And. because the qualities (men- tioned in the texts) are appropriate (only in the case of Brahman).

The qualities referred to are: Truth, resting on its owr greatness, non-duality, bliss, all-pervading- ness, immortality, etc., mentioned in the text under discussion, which hold good only in the case of Brah- man and not of the vital force, which is but an effect and as such cannot possess any of these qualities. Moreover the chapter begins thus: ‘‘The knower of the Self goes beyond misery’’, which shows that the Self or Brahman is the subject to be known. It is therefore delineated in the subsequent texts.

In the previous section because the epithet ‘Truth’ is generally applied to Brahman, the Bhuman was interpreted as Brahman. Following the same

argument the opponent holds that the word ‘Akshara’ should mean the syllable ‘Om’ in the texts to be taken up for discussion in this section, for ‘Akshara’ generally means word or syllable.

AATAPATFATa: tl 20 tt

wavy The Akshara watwa-ya: ( because } it supports all up to Akasa (ether).

10. The Akshara (the Imperishabie) (is Brahman) because it supports (every- thing) up to Akasa (ether).

‘O Gargi, the Brahmanas call this Akshara”’ etc. (Brih. 3. 8. 8). Here the question is whether ‘Akshara’ means the syllable ‘Om’ or Brahman. The doubt arises because ‘Akshara’ etymologically means a syllable and therefore commonly represents the syllable ‘Om’, which is also an object of meditation. The Sutra however says ‘Akshara’ here stands for Brahman. Why? For the text says, ‘“‘In_ that Akshara, O Gargi, is the ether woven like warp and woof”? (Brih. 3. 8. 11). This attribute of supporting everything, even the Akasa, the first entity in the order of creation, can be true only of Brahman. Then again  it is neither gross nor minute, neither short nor long’ etc. (Brih. 3. 8. 8) shows that all relative qualities are absent in it. Therefore the ‘Akshara’ is Brahman. |

4.3.12] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 101

QT A AMMAN | &2 Il

a This (supporting) 4 also wateatq because of the eomimand.

11. Beeause of the command (attri- buted to Akshara) this (supporting) (can be the work of the Highest Self only and not of the Pradhana).

‘Under the mighty rule of that Immutable (Akshara), O Gargi, the sun and the moon arc held in their positions’? (Brih. 3. 8. 9). This command or rulership cannot be the work of the non-intelligent Pradhana. So the Pradhana cannot be the ‘Akshara’ which supports everything up to Akasa.

AAMASATTATA tt 22 I

9aj-aia-saaa: Because the qualities of any other than Brahman have been negated 4 also.

12. And because the qualities of any other than Brahman have been negated (by the Sruti).

All other qualities referred to in the text, as, for example, seeing, hearing, thinking, knowing, etc. (Brih. 8. 8. 11) point to a conscious principle and therefore negate the Pradhana etc. Nor can it be the individual soul, which is not free from limiting ad- juncts as the Akshara is described.

is the Highest Brahman.

In the last section the word ‘Akshara’, though it generally means syllable, was interpreted to refer to Brahman on account of the characteristic quality of supporting everything and we had to go to the etymo- logical meaning of the word Akshara viz. that which does not perish or undergo change i.e. Brahman. ‘Similarly in the text to be taken up for discussion the opponent holds that on account of the attainment of Brahmaloka as the result of the meditation we have to take by the Highest Person the Lower Brahman or Hiranyagarbha which is relatively speaking higher, and not the Higher Brahman.

tefannerasang a: i 23

gufa-aaH Object of seeing ™I@mMIq because of his being mentioned @: he.

13. Because of his being mentioned as an object of (the act of) seeing, he (who is to be meditated upon is Brahman).

‘‘Again he who meditates with the syllable ‘Om’ of three Matras (A-u-m), on the Highest Person’’ etc. (Pr. 5. 5). A doubt arises whether the Highest Brahman or the Lower Brahman is meant, because, in 5. 2 both are mentioned, and also because Brahma- loka is described as the fruit by the worship of this Highest Person. The Sutra says that this Highest

1.3.14] PRAHMA-SUTRAS 103

Person.is the Higiiest Brahman and not Hiranya- yarbha (the Lower Brahman). Why? Because the peragraph ends thus: ‘“‘He sees the Highest Person,’’ which shows that he realizes or actually gets identified with the Highcst Person. It is not a mere imagination but an actuality, for the object of an act of seeing is an actuality, as we find from experience. But Hiranyagarbha is an imaginary being, since it is a product of ignorance. Hence the Highest Person means the Highest Brahman, which is a reality, and this very Brahman is taught at the beginning of the paragraph as the object of meditation, for it is not possible to realize one entity by meditating on another.

The attainment of Brahma'oka by the worshipper should not be regarded as an insignificant fruit of the worship of the Highest Person, for it is a step in gradual emancipation (Krama Mukti). First he attains this Loka and then final beatitude.

In the previous section the epithet ‘Highest Person,’ being generally used with reference to the Highest Brahman, was taken to mean that. The opponent now follows this argument and wants to interpret the word ‘Akasa’ occurring in the texts to be taken up for discussion in this section, as ether, that being the ordinary meaning of the word.

QT FATA: || LS Il

29x: Small saute: because of subsequent texts.

14. The small (Ak4sa) (is Brahman) because of subsequent texts (which give ample indication to that effect).

Now there is in this city of Brahman (the body)

a small lotus-like palace (the heart), and in it a small Akasa. What exists within that small Akfsa is to be sought, that is to be understood’’ (Chh. 8. 1. 1). Here the “small Akasa’ is Brahman and does not mean ether, though it is the ordinary meaning of the word; nor does it mean the Jiva or individual soul, though there is the qualification ‘small’, which may show that it is a limited something. Why? Because the characteristics of Brahman occur later on in the text, “As large as this (external) ether is, so large is that Akasa within the heart’? (Chh. 8. 1. 3), which clearly shows it is not actually small. Again Akasa cannot be compared with itself, nor can the limited individual soul be compared with the all-pervading ether. Therefore the two are precluded. Then we have the characteristics of Brahman. ‘‘Both the earth and heaven are contained in it’’ (Ibid. 8. 1. 3), which shows that this Ak4sa is the support of the whole world. ‘‘It is the Self, free from sin, free from ‘old age”? ete. (Ibid. 8.1.5), all of which are distinctly qualities of the Highest Brahman.

nfamegreat, aut fe go fay a 4

afameraia From going and the word aa fe likewise Ze’ it is seen fa¥q indicatory sign 4 and.

1.3.16] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 105

15. The small Akasa (is Brahman) on account of going (into Brahman) and vf the word (Brahmaloka); it (2e. the individual soul’s going into Brahman) is likewise seen (from other Sruti texts); and (the daily going) is an indicatory sign (by which we can interpret the word Brahmaloka).

This Sutra gives further reasons that the ‘small Akasa’ is Brahman.

‘All these creatures day after day go into this Brahmaloka (i.e. they are merged in Brahman while fast asleep) and yet do not discover it’’ etc. (Chh. 8. 3. 2). ‘his text shows chat in deep sleep all Jivas go daily into the ‘small Akasa’, called here Brahmaloka (the world of Brahman), thus showing that the ‘small Akasa’ is Brahman. In other Sruti texts also we find that this going of the individual soul into Brahman in deep sleep is mentioned: ‘‘He becomes united with the Real (Sat), he is merged in his own self’? (Chh. 6. 8. 1). The word ‘Brahmalcka’ is to be interpretcd as Brahman Itself, and not as the world of Brahma, because of the indicatory sign in the text where it is said that the soul goes to this world every day, for it is not possible to go to the world of Brahma every day.

gaa, afeatsearferegasea: 11 2é

¥4: On account of the supporting ( of the world

by the Akasa ) 4 moreover We afea: this greatness ufaqin Brahman sya: being seen.

16. Moreover on account of the supporting (of the world by the small Akasa it is Brahman) for this greatness is seen in this (Brahman only from other scriptural texts).

‘‘That Self is a bank, a limiting support, so that these worlds may not get confounded’’, (Chh. 8. 4. 1) —in which text is seen the glory of the ‘small Akasa’ by way of holding the worlds asunder. It is learnt beyond doubt from other texts that this great- ness of supporting belongs to Brahman alone:

Under the mighty rule of that Immutable (Akshara),

O Gargi, the sun and moon are held in their positions’’

Tas Ta | LO Il

ufag: Because of the well-known ( meaning ) 4 also.

17. Also because of the well-known meaning (of Akasa as Brahman the ‘small Ak4asa’ is Brahman).

‘‘Akasa is the revealer of all names and forms’? (Chh. 8. 14. 1); ‘All these beings take their rise from Akasa alone’? (Chh. 1. 9. 1). In all these passages. ‘Akasa’ stands for Brahman.

1.8.18] BhAHMA-SUTRAS 107

TATATIAMI a efa Aq, a, HARTI ULE

sat-qaanty Because of the reference to the other (ie. the individual soul )#: he (the individual soul ) xfa @q if it be said 4 no Waa on account of impossibility.

18. Because of the reference to the other (a.e. the individual soul in a comple- mentary passage) if it be said that he (the individual soul) {and not Brahman is. meant by the ‘smal! Akasa’), (we say) no, on account of the impossibility (of such an assumpticn).

“‘Now that being, the individual soul (Jiva) in deep sleep, which having risen above this earthly body”’ etc. (Chh. 8. 38. 4). Since in this complemen- tary passage the individual soul is referred to, one may say that the ‘small Akasa’ of Chh. 8. 1. 1 is also the individual soul. It cannot be; for a comparison is made in Chh. 8. 1. 3 between the ‘small Akdsa” and the ether, which would be absurd if by ‘small Akasa’ Jiva were meant, because there can be no comparison between a thing that is limited like the individual soul and the all-pervading ether. The attributes like ‘free from evil’ of this Akasa, referred to in the passage under discussion, cannot be true of the individual soul. So Brahman is meant in that passage,

TAUISA, ATNTASTAITT it LE It

sauq From subsequent texts (in the chapter ) aq if wifaya-@eq: with its real nature made manifest gq but.

19. If (it be said) that from sub- sequent texts (which contain references to the Jiva, ‘small Akasa’ means the Jiva) (we say) but (that reference to the Jiva is in so far as its) real nature (as non-different from Brahman) is made manifest.

An objection is again raised to justify that the ‘small Akasa’ refers to the individual soul. In Chh. in the later sections, viz. sections 7-11 of chapter 8, the different states of the individual soul are men- tioned. Section 7 begins thus: ‘‘That self which is free from sin... is -what is to be searched”’ etc. Then we have, ‘‘That person who is seen in the eye (the individual soul) is the self’? (Chh. 8. 7. 4); ‘“‘He who moves glorified in dreams is the self’? (Chh. 8.10.1). ‘When a being is thus asleep, drawn in, per- fectly serene, and sees no dreams, that is the self’’ (Chh. 8.11.1). And in each of these descriptions of the self we have for it the qualifying terms, ‘immortal and fearless’, which show that it is free from evil. It is clear that here the individual soul is meant, and not the Supreme Lord, for the latter is free from these three states viz. waking, dream, and deep sleep; and

1.3.21] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 109

it is also said to be free from evil. Therefore ‘small Akasa’ in the creceding section refers to the soul and not to the Supreme Lord.

This Sutra refutes this and says that the refer-. ence is to the individunl soul in its real nature as identical with Brahman and not to the individual soul as such. ‘‘As soon as it has approached the highest light it appears in its own form. It (then) is the Highest Purusha’”’ (Chh. &. 12. 3). It is only as non- different from Brahman that the Jiva is free from evil ete. and not as the individual soul.

AAI FLA: |! Ro Il

way: For a different purpese 4 and quan: refe- rence. 20. And the reference (to the individ- ual scul) is for a different purpose. The detailed reference to the three states of the individual sou! (Jiva) is meant not to establish the nature of the individual soul as such, but to show

finally its real nature, which is non-different from. Brahman.

aepaiela Bq, ATH Wt 2

waqd: Because of the Sruti declaring its small- ness tf 9q if it be said aq that smq has already been explained.

21. if it be said that because the Sruti declares the limitedness (of this.

Akasa, therefore it cannot refer to the all-pervading Brahman); (we say) that has already been explained (as having reference to devout meditation only.:

Brahman. ' In the last section, in the text quoted (Chh. 8. 12. 8) there is mention of ‘the highest light’. This section is introduced to prove that what was referred to as ‘light’? is Brahman, and for this other texts are taken up for discussion in which this ‘light’ is men- ‘tioned.

AIDACTET FT I 2 I wand: Because of the acting after 4@ Its 4 and.

22. Because of the acting after (1.e. shining after) (That which shining, every- thing else shines) and (because by) Its (light everything else is lighted).

‘There the sun does not shine, nor the moon. » » It shining, everything else shines after It, by Its light all this is lighted’? (Mu. 2. 2. 11). Here ‘It’ refers to the Supreme Brahman, the pure Conscious- ness, and not to any material light besides the sun and the moon. It is absurd to say that one light is lighted by another. Nor do we know of any material light besides the sun that can light it. ‘It

1.8.24] ‘RRAHMA-SUTRAS 11

shining, everything else shines’ shows that it is the principle of Inielligence which shines first of all. ‘By Tts light all this is lighted’ shows that it is the light of Intelligence, Consciousness or Brahman which illu- mines the whole world, luminous and non-luminous. That Brahman is self-luminous we learn from texts like, ‘‘It is the light oi lights.’’

os Ce aif @] cag |) 23 Il afq @ Moreover aaa the Smriti states.

23. Moreover the Smriti states (It to be the universal light).

“‘That the sun illumines not’’ ete. (Gita 15. 6) and also ‘The light which residing in the sun illu- mines the whole world, that which is in the moon and in the fire—know that light to be Mine’”’ (Gita 15. 12).

Section 7: The person of the size of a thumb is Brahman.

weaiza ofaa: | 22 I weiq From the word 4% itself ufaa: measured.

24. From the very word (‘Lord’ by which it is referred to in the text) (the being) measured (by the size of the thumb is Brahman). |

‘‘The being of the size of a thumb, resides in the

centre of the body. (Knowing that) Lord of the past and future, one does not seek to hide oneself

any more. This is That’’ (Kath. 2. 4. 12). The being referred to is Brahman, because he is spoken of as the Lord or ruler of the past and future. It cannot be the individual soul, though the limitation in size and residence in the centre of the body by themselves. might be more applicable in its case. Moreover in reply to the request of Nachiketas who wanted to know Brahman, Yama refers to this being of the size of a thumb a ‘That which you wanted to know is this.”

STC Ff ATCUTPARMITT | RY Il

efe-stqa1 With reference to the heart 4 but a4a- wfaartarq man (alone) being entitled.

25. But with reference to (the space in) the heart (the Highest Brahman is said to be of the size of a thumb); (and because) man alone is entitled (to the study of the Vedas).

How could the all-pervading Brahman be of the size of a thumb, as stated by the previous Sutra? Because the space in the heart is of the size of a thumb, therefore Brahman, with reference to Its abiding within that space, is described as being of the size of a thumb. Since Brahman abides within the heart of all living creatures, why is the ‘thumb’ used as a standard? Because man alone is entitled to the study of the Vedas and to the different Upasanas of

1.8.26] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 118

Brahman prescribed in them, therefore it is with reference tu hin: that the thumb’ is used as the standard of measurement.

Topw 8: The right cf the gods to the study of the Vedas.

agate arecrant: AATATA |) RE

azafe Above thein Wit also aretiau: Badardvana ava because ( it is ) possible.

26. (Beings) above them (men) also (are entitled to the study of the Vedas) because (it is) possible (for them also to attain Knowledge according to) Bada- rayana.

In Sutras 26-38 there is a digression from the main topic in the Section. A doubt may arise from the previous Sutra that as it is said that men alone are entitled to the study of the Vedas, the gods are thereby debarred. To remove this doubt this Sutra is given. The gods are also entitled to it, according ‘ to Badarayana. How? Because it is possible for them also—since they too are corporeal beings—to have a desire for Brahmaloka or for final illumination and also to possess the necessary requisites (the four- fold qualification) for such illumination. In the Sruti also we find,.I[Indra and other gods living the life of Brahmacharya for attaining this knowledge of Brahman. For instance, Chh. 8. 11. 8; also Taitt.

“114 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.3.26

8. 1, where the god Varuna is said to have possessed that Knowledge which he teaches to his son Bhrigu.

facta: saiifa Aq, a, setnnfaqcdegrara so fatty; Contradiction wafa to sacrifices xfa Sq if it

be said 4 not waa-nfagd: the assumption of many (forms) aq because it is found (in the scriptures).

27. Ifit be said (that the corporeality of the gods would involve) a contradiction to sacrifices:; (we say) no, because we find (in the scriptures) the assumption (by the, gods) of many (forms at one and the same time).

If gods possess bodies, then it would not be possi- ble for one and the same god to be present in sacri- fices performed simultaneously at different places. This is the objection, which is refuted by the latter part of the Sutra on the ground that the gods, like the Yogis, owing to their Yoga powers are capable of assuming several forms (Kayavyuha) simultaneously. See Chh. 7. 26. 2. Again as a sacrifice consists in making offerings by the sacrificer to some divinity, many persons at the same time may make such offer- ings to a single divinity, even as many persons can at the same time salute a single person.

meq efa a, a, Aa: Waa seTag- ATATHATT ll XC Ut

1.8.28] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 115

wz With regard to ( Vedic ) words sfa 9q if it be said 4no a: frum these (words) wala because of the creation seuwaaaray from direct perception and inference.

28. If it be said (that the corpo- reality of the gods would involve a contradiction) with regard to (Vedic) words, (we say) no, because of the creation (of the world together with the gods) from these (words), (as is known) from direct perception (Sruti) and inference (Smriti).

A further objection is raised with respect to the corporeality of the gods. If they have a body, they too like men would be subject to births and deaths. Now all the words in the Vedas according to Purva Mimamsa are eternal. So also every word has for its counterpart a form, an object which it denotes. The relation between a name or word and form (the object) is eternal. The word or name, its object, and their relation are eternal verities. Now in the Vedas we find words like Indra, Varuna, etc.—the names of the gods. If these gods are not eternal, since they possess bodies, then these words cannot have their eternal counterpart, the object. So the eternity and authoritativeness of the Vedas, which are based on the eternal relation between the word and its object, would be a myth. This is the main objection. It is answered thus. Hach word of the Vedas has an

objective counterpart, which is not an individual but a type. The word ‘cow’, for instance, has for its counterpart the object, which is a type and as such is eternal and does not depend on the birth or death of individuals belonging to that type. Similar is the case with words like Indra, Varuna, ete. Words re- presenting the gods etc. have for their counterpart objects that are types and not individuals. Again Indra is the name of any one who would occupy that exalted position, like the word ‘king’ in ordinary parlance. So there is no contradiction to Vedic words. As a matter of fact, the world including the gods etc. have originated from Vedic words. This does not mean that the Vedic words constitute the material cause of these things, which Brahman alone is, as stated in Sutra 1. 1. 2. What then is meant? According to Indian philosophy the universe and its objects have both name and form as the conditions of their manifestation. There can be no mental stgte (Chitta-vritti) unconditioned by name and form. The thought wave first manifests as a word and then as the more concrete form. The idea is the essence, and the form is, as it were, the outer crust. What is true of the individual mind is also true of the cosmic mind. In this sense only is the world said to be created, rather manifested, from the Vedic words. This is endorsed by the Sruti and Smriti. In the Vedas it is said that the Lord uttered different words before creating different types of beings. - Vide Brih. 1. 2. 4. ‘The several names, actions, and con-

1.8.80] PRAHMA-SUTRAS 117

ditions of all things He shaped in the beginning from the words of the Vedas’? (Manu 1.21).

aa oe a fereaeTy tl RE

wazy From this very reason 4 also fama the eternity.

29. From ibis very reason also (results) the eternity (of the Vedas).

Since the objects are eternal, that is, gods etc. as types are eternal, the Vedic words are eternal. This establishes the eternal nature of the Vedas. The Vedas were not written by anybody. They are impersonal and eternal. The Rishis only discovered them but were noi authors of the Vedic texts. ‘‘By means of their past good deeds (the priests) attained the capacity to understand the Vedas; (then) they found them dwelling in the Rishis’’ (Rig-Veda 10.71.38), which shows that the Vedas are eternal.

VATAATARITATMN TAA ACA TAT TAALS | Bo Il

aay-araagaia = Because of similar names and forms Mand Watt in the revolving of the world cycles "fq even wfaity: no contradiction etna from the Sruti 9@: from the Smriti 4 and.

30. And because of the sameness of

names and forms (in every fresh cycle) there is no contradiction (to the eternity

of the Vedic words) even in the revolving of the world cycles, as is seen from the Sruti and the Smriti.

An objection is raised. Since at the end of a cycle everything is completely destroyed and creation begins afresh at the beginning of the next cycle, there is a break in the continuity of existence; so even as types the gods are not eternal. This upsets the eternal relation of Vedic words and the objects they represent, and consequently the eternity of the Vedas and their authority fall to the ground. This Sutra refutes it..Just as a person after waking from deep sleep finds no break in the continuity of existence, so also in the state of Pralaya (end of a cycle) the world is in a potential state—in seed form—in ignorance, and not completely destroyed; at the beginning of the next cycle it is again manifested into a gross form with all the previous variety of names and forms. As the world does nqt become absolutely non-existent, the eternity of the relation between Vedic words and their objects is not contradicted, and consequently the authoritativeness of the Vedas remains. This eternal existence of the world in gross and fine forms alternatively and the similarity of the names and forms are brought out by the Sruti and Smriti texts.

As formerly the Lord ordered the sun and the moon,

heaven, earth, the sky’”’ etc. (Rig-Veda 10. 190. 8).

marferqarrargaarart afeafa: 1 32 tt

1.3.82] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 119

walfey In Madhu Vidya etc. waHarq on account of the impossibility waft disqualification sfafa: Jaimini ( is of opinion ).

31. On account of the impossibility (of the gods) being qualified for Madhu Vidya etc. Jaimini (is of opinion that the gods) are not qualified (either for Upasanaés or for the knowledge of Brahman).

In many of the Upasanaés (devout meditations) a person is asked to meditate on ihe self of some god or other. For example, in Madhu Vidya one is to meditate on the sun as honey (something helpful). Such a meditation will be impossible for the sun-god. Hence in Upasands where onc has to meditate on the self of certain gods, these divinities themselves would naturally be disqualified; for the same person cannot be both the object of meditation and the worshipper. So Jaimini thinks that the gods are not qualified for these devout meditations or for the knowledge of the Supreme Brahman.

sat fat arate 1 aR Hl anfafg As mere spheres of light aa because

( used ) in the sense 4 and.

82. And (the gods are not qualified for Vidyas) because (the words ‘sun’,

‘moon’, etc., spoken of as gods) are used in the sense of mere spheres of light.

A further objection is given. There is no proof as to the existence of gods with hands, feet, etc., and with desires—which would qualify them for medita- tions and Knowledge. These are mere riames of planets and luminary objects and as such are material inert things. Consequently they are not qualified for any kind of Vidya (meditation) pre- scribed in the scriptures.

‘wma gf argcrau:, afer fF 1 33

wa The existence (of qualification ) 4 but aleaay: ( sage ) Badarayana | maintains ) wa does exist f€ because. |

33. But Badaradyana (maintains) the existence (of qualification on the part of the gods for the knowledge of Brahman), because (all ‘those causes like body, desires, etc., which qualify one for such knowledge) do exist (in the case of the gods).

Badarayana thinks that besides the luminary orbs like the sun, moon, etc., each of them has a presiding deity of that name with body, intelligence, desires, etc., and as such there being all the causes which can qualify them for the Upasanas and Supreme Knowledge, the gods also are entitled to them. The

1.8.34] BRAAMA-SUTRAS 121

fact that the sun-god cannot be entitled to Madhu Vidy& because he cannot meditate on the sun, i.e. hin.self, does not disqualify him for other devout meditations or for the knowledge of Brahman. Similar is the case with cther gods.

of the Vedas discussed.

RST AQAA, Agar, wad fe tl ae

wa Grief 4a his aq-watrewwaaiq from hearing his (the Rishi’s ) contemptuous words 44 that ( grief ) wizamq owing to his approachirg 44 is referred to

fe because. F

34. Htis (King Janasruti’s) grief (arose) from hearing the contemptuous words (of the Rishi in the form of a swan); owing to his approaching (Raikva over- whelmed with) that (grief) (Raikva called him Sudra); because it (the grief) is referred to (by Raikva, who could read his mind).

In the previous Sutra it has been shown that the gods are entitled to the Vedas and Knowledge. This Sutra discusses whether the Sudras are entitled to them or not. Since, like the gods, the Sudras also are possessed of a body, strength, and desires, it naturally follows that they too are entitled. In

Chhandogya 4.2.5 Raikva at first calls Janasruti, a Sudra, when he comes for instruction with presents, which are refused. But when he appears a second time, Raikva again calls him a Sudra, but this time accepts his presents and teaches him. So it is maintained that the Sudras also are qualified for Knowledge.

This Sutra refutes the view and denies the right to the study of the Vedas for a Sudra by caste, since the word ‘Sudra’ occurring in the text referred to does not denote a Sudra by birth, which is its con- ventional meaning, for Janasruti was a Kshatriya king (Chh. 4. 1. 8). Here we must take the etymo- logical meaning of the word, which is ‘‘He rushed into grief” or “He in his grief immediately approached Raikva.’’ The following Sutra also shows that he was a Kshatriya.

afrareararaaca aacta feta 3 tl

afagaaa: ( His ) Kshatriyahood being known ¥ and 3ava Jater on waraa fasta by the indicatory sign ( of his being mentioned ) along with a descendant of Chitraratha ( a Kshatriya ).

35. And because the Kshatriyahood (of Janasruti) is known later on by the indicatory sign (of his being mentioned) along with a descendant of Chitraratha (a Kshatriya).

1.8.87] BRALMA-SUTRAS 123

Janasruti is mentioned with the Kshatriya Chaitraratha Abh'pratérin in connection with the sam Vidya, and so we can infer that Janasruti also was a Kshatriya, for as a rule equals alone are mentioned together.

BERTI AM ATATATFASTATT | BE I

weae-quanta Purificatorv ceremonies being men- tioned aq-wiia-sfawimg its absence being/declared @ and.

36. Because purificatory ceremonies are mentioned (in the case of the twice- born) and their absence are declared (in the case of the Sudras).

Purificatory ceremonies like Upanayana etc. are declared bv the scriptures to be a necessary condition of the study of all kinds of knowledge or Vidya; but these are meant only for the higher castes. Their absence in the case of the Sudras is repeatedly declared in the scriptures. ‘‘Sudras do not incur sin (by eating prohibited food), ncr have they any purificatory rights’’ ete. (Manu 10. 12. 6). Conse- quently they are not entitled to the study of the Vedas.

aarafrwrcet J TTA: Ut 39 tt

aezwra-fralca On the ascertainment of the absence of that (Sudrahood ) ¥ and wed: from inclina- tion.

87. And because the inclination (on the part of Gautama to impart Knowledge is seen only) on the ascertainment of the absence of Sudrahood (in Jabala Satya- kama).

That Sudras are not qualified is known also from the fact that great teachers like Gautama made sure ‘before imparting Knowledge that disciples like Jabala Satyakama were not Sudras. See Chh. 4. 4. 5.

TINT ATAUAM ADA SAAT Ul Be Nl

Tay-Waye-qe-afaswia Because of the prohibition of hearing, studying, and understanding @@: in the Smriti 4 and.

38. And because of the prohibition in the Smriti of hearing and studying (the Vedas) and knowing their meaning and performing Vedic rites (to Sudras, they are not entitled to the knowledge of Brahman).

Sutras 34-38 disqualify the Sudra for the knowl- édge of Brahman through the study of the Vedas. But it is possible for them to attain that knowledge through the Puranas and the epics (Ramayana and Mahabharata).

The digression begun from Sutra 26 ends here and the general topic is again taken up.

1.8.39] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 125

Tonic 10: The Prena in which everything trembles 1s Brahman.

In tepic 7 it was proved that the reference to the Jiva was to inculcate the knowledge of Brahman, as the former is really identical with Brahman. But in the text to be discussed ‘Prana’ cannot refer to Brahman, a» such identity is not possible—this seems to be the line cf thinking of the opponent, who there- fore takes up this topic for discussion.

ITAA tt BE Ut waa On account of vibration.

39. (Prana is Brahman) on account of the vibration (spoken of the whole world).

‘‘Whatever there is in the whole world has come out of and trembles in the Prana” etc. (Kath. 2. 6. 2). Here ‘Prana’ is Brahman and not the vital force. Why? First because of the context, since Brahman is the topic in the previous and subsequent texts. Again ‘“The whole world trembles in Prana’’—in this we have reference to an attribute of Brahman, It being the abode of the whole world. It is the cause of the life of the whole world including the Prana. Lastly. immortality is declared to him who knows this Prana, and ‘Prana’ is also often used to denote Brahman in the Sruti.

In the’ last topic ‘Prana’ was taken to mean Brahman from the context. But in the text taken up for discussion in this topic, there is no such context by which ‘light’ can be taken to be Brahman —so says the opponent.

satfaa tare tl Bo it

sitfa: Light exnmq on account of (Brahman) being seen.

40. Light (is Brahman) on account of (Brahman) being seen (as the subject of the texts).

“Thus does that serene being, arising from the body, appear in its own form as soon as it has approached the highest light’? (Chh. 8. 12. 3). Here ‘highest light’ stands for Brahman. Why? Because Brahman is the subject of the whole section. The ‘highest light’ is also called the Highest Person in that text itself later on. Freedom from the body is said to belong to that being which is one with this ‘hight’. Disembodied state or Freedom can arise only from being identified with Brahman.

and forms is Brahman.

ATHIM SAPaACcaT SSAA lt Vz

wiaia; Akasa vwalevarfe-agemq because it is declared to be something different ete.

1.3.42] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 127

41. Akasa (is Brahman) because it is declared to be something different etc. (from names and forms and yet their revealcr). |

“That which is calied Akasa is the revealer of all names and forms. That within which these names and forms are, is Brahman, the immortal, the Self”

Here ‘Akasa’ is Brahman. Why? Because names and forms are suid to be within this Ah4asa, which is therefore different from these. In this phenomenal world everything is conditioned by name and form, and Brahman alone is beyond them. Akasa is said to be the revealer of names and forms; and as the Inner Ruler of the whole world of names and forms it cannot be anything else but Brahman. Moreover, epithets like ‘Infinite’, ‘Immortal’, ‘Self’ also show that ‘Akasa’ here refers to Brahman.

is not the individual soul but Brahman.

In the previous topic because Akasa was spoken of as different from names and forms, 1t was taken as Brahman. This argument is objected to by the opponent, who cites that even difference is spoken of with respect to the individual soul and Brahman, who are really identical. So this topic is taken up

for discussion.

DICTA ATT | 82 I

ayfa-semieat: In deep sleep and death &%2@a as different.

42. Because of the Supreme Self being shown as different (from the individual soul) in the states of deep sleep and death.

-In the sixth chapter of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, in reply to the question, ‘‘Which is that Self?’ (4. 3. 7), a lengthy exposition of the nature of the Self is given. The question is whether the Self is the Supreme Self or the individual soul. This Sutra says it is the Supreme Self. Why? Because it is shown to be different from the individual self in the state of deep sleep and at the time of death. ‘‘This person, embraced by the supremely intelligent Self, knows nothing that is without or within’? (Brih. 4. 3. 21), which shows that in deep sleep the ‘person’ which represents the individual soul, is different from the Supreme Self, called here the supremely intelligent Self.

The ‘person’ is the individual soul, because the absence of the knowledge of exernal things and things within in deep sleep can be predicated only of the individual soul, which is the knower, and the supremely intelligent Self is Brahman because such intelligence can be predicated of Brahman only. Similarly at the time of death. Brih. 4. 38. 85). Therefore Brahman is the chief topic in this section.

1.8.48] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 129

The extensive discourse on the individual soul in this section is nct to establish its Jivahood, but to show that it is in reality not different from Brahman.

rreatigrredezy: |} 23 I

43. On aceount of words lke ‘Lord’ etc. (the Self in the text under discussion is the Supreme Self).

Epithets like ‘Lord’, ‘Ruler’, ete. are applied. to the ‘Self? discussed in the text (Vide Brih. 4. 4. 22), and these are apt only in the case of Brahman, for these epithets show that the thing spoken of is beyond bondage. So the word ‘Self? denotes the Supreme Self and not the Jiva.


CHAPTER I
---------

[Section IV]

In topic 5, section 1, it has been shown that as the Sankhyan Pradhana is not based on scriptural authorigy and that as the Sruti texts all refer to an imelligen principle as the First Cause, Brahman is that First Cause. In all the subsequent Sutras of the first three sections it has been shown how all the Vedanta texts refer to Brahman. Now the fact that the Pradhana is not based on scriptural authority is questioned by the opponent, and his objections are being answered. The whole of section 4 practically answers all objections from the Sankhyan standpoint.

Upanishad do not refer to the Sdnkhyan categories.

In the last topic of the previous section, by a reference to the well-known individual soul, Brahman, which is not so well known, was taught.. So the opponent in this topic holds that the reference to Avyakta in the text to be quoted should be taken to deal with the well-known Sankhyan category.

argafaanaaaiata aq, a, wieT- farucagaa:, astafa au 2 1

wiqetfaaq That which is inferred ( i.e. the Pra- dhana ) “fq also T&iTq in some ( recensions of the

1.4.1] RRAHMA-SUTRAS 131

texts ) sf @q if it be said ano xie-aun-farre-wha: because it is mentioned in a simile referring to the body ewzafa (the Sruti) explains ¥ too.

1. If it ve said that in some (recen- sions of the Vedas) that which is inferred (1.e. the Pradhana) (is) also (mentioned), (we say) no, because (the word ‘Avyakta’ occurring in the Katha Upanishad) is men- tioned in a simile referring to the body (and means the body itself and not the Pradhana of the Sankhyas); (the Sruti) too explains (it).

An objection is again raised here by the Sankhyas that the Pradhana is also based on scriptural authority, for some Sakhas (Vedic recen- sions) like the Katha Sakha (school) © contain expressions wherein the Pradhana seems to be referred to: ‘‘Beyond the Mahat (Great) there is the Avyakta (Undeveloped), beyond the Undeveloped is the Purusha (Being)” etc. (Kath. 1. 8.11). The word ‘Avyakta’, they say, here refers to the Pradhana. Because the words ‘Mahat’, ‘Avaykata’, and ‘Purusha’, which occur in the same order as mentioned in the Sankhya philosophy, occur in the text, and so they are recognized to be the same categories of the Sankhyas.

This Sutra after raising this objection refutes it thus: The word ‘Avyakta’ is used in connection with a simile referring to the body, and does not

refer to the Pradhana. In that word we recognize something mentioned in an earlier text. ‘‘Know that the soul is the rider of the chariot and the body the chariot. Consider the intellect to be the chariotéer and the mind the reins. The senses, they say, are the horses, and their roads are the sense- objects”? etc. (Kath. 1. 8. 3-4). All these things that are referred to in these verses are to be found in the following: ‘The objects are superior to the senses, the mind is superior to the objects, the intellect is superior to the mind, the Mahat is superior again to the intellect, the Avyakta is superior to the Mahat, and the Purusha is superior to the Avyakta. Nothing is superior to the Purusha,”’ etc. (Kath. 1. 8. 10-11).

Now compare these two quotations. The senses, mind and intellect, mentioned in the earlier texts, are to be found in these later texts. The Atman of the earlier texts is denoted by the ‘Purusha’ of the later ones. The Mahat of the later texts mean the cosmic intellect and so is included in the intellect of the earlier texts, where it is used in a compre- hensive sense to include both the individual and cosmic intellects. What remains is only the body in the earlier texts, and Avyakta in the later texts; and so Avyakta means the body here and not the Pradhana. We shall not be justified in interpreting a Sruti according to Saénkhyan technicalities. For the purpose of recognition a comparison should be made not with the Smriti, but with similar passages of the Sruti itself, like those cited above.

1.4.8] BR.AHMA-SUTRAS 188

qat § ASECTTAL | 2 Il

aa Subtle'¢ but azear because it can be pro- perly so designated. |

2. But the subtle (cause of the body is meant by the term ‘Avyakta’) because it can be properly so designated.

An objection is raised. As the body is gross and developed, how can it be referred to by the term “Avyakta’ (Undeveloped)? The answer is, here, not the gross body but the causal substance, i.e. the five uncompounded elements out of which the body is built, is meant. They, being subtle and not fully manifest and also being beyond sense perception, can be properly designated by the term ‘Avyakta’ (Undeveloped). It is also a common thing to denote the effect by the cause and hence indirectly the gross body is referred to here. ‘‘Mix the Soma with the cow (i.e. milk)"? (Rig Veda 9. 46. 4).

aaetacaratad tl 3 il

aemtaatq On account of its dependence wzaq is fitting.

3. On account of its dependence (on the Lord), it fits in (with our theory).

It may be said that if a subtle causal condition of the gross world is thus admitted, it is as good as accepting the Pradhina. This Sutra makes the difference clear. While the Pradhana of the Sankhyas

is an independent entity, the subtle causal condition admitted here is dependent on the Supreme Lord. Such a causal condition has necessarily to be admitted, for without that the Lord cannot create. It is the potential power, the causal potentiality inherent in Brahman. It is Nescience. That ex- plains why, when one’s ignorance is destroyed. by Knowledge, there is no possibility of that liberated soul getting into bondage again. About this ignor- ance you can neither say that it is nor that it is not; it is an illusion and so it is reasonably called undeveloped (Avyakta). This ignorance or creative power cannot create of itself without the instrument- ality of the Lord. The illusion of a snake in a rope is not possible merely through ignorance without the rope. So also the world cannot be created merely by ignorance without the substratum, the Lord. Hence it is dependent on the Lord. Yet the Lord is not in the least affected by this ignorance, even as the poison does not affect the snake which has it. “Know then Prakriti is Maya and the great Lord the ruler of Maya’’ (Svet 4. 10). So the Avyakta is a helper, as it were, to Iswara in His creation, and hence such an Avyakta dependent on the Lord is significant and has to be admitted, says the Sutra.

Ff AcAaAAATA |) 8 Il

q aaa Because it is not mentioned (as some- thing) to be known ¥ and.

4, And because it is not mentioned

1.4.5} BRAHMA-SUTRAS 185

(that the Avvakta) is to be known (it cannot be the Pradhana of the Sankhyas).

Liberation, according to the Sankhyas, results when the difference between the Purusha and the Avyakta (Prakriti) is known. Hence the Avyakta, with them, is to be known. But here there is no question of knowing the Avyakta, and as such it cannot he the Pradh4ana of the Sankhyas.

aaatfa Aq, a, seat fe waco 1 Ul

qafa Does state sfa 4q if it be said 4 no am: intel- ligent Self fe for ¥#<aq from the context.

5. If it be said (that the Sruti) does state (that the Avyakta has to be known and therefore it is the Pradhana); (we say) no, for (it is) the intelligent (Supreme) Self (which is meant), since that is the topic.

‘He who has perceived that which is without sound, without touch... beyond the Mahat (Great) and unchangeable, is freed from the jaws of death’? (Kath. 1. 8. 15). The Sankhvas hold that in this text the Sruti says that the Pradhana has to be known to attain Freedom; for the description given of the entity to be known tallies with the Pradhana, which is also beyond the Mahat. The Sutra refutes this saying that by Avyakta, the one beyond the Mahat (Great) etc., the intelligent

(Supreme) Self is meant, as that is the subject-matter of that section.

AATNTAT AITTTTATA: Tatar tl & tt

aarary Of three vq only 4 and v4 thus suas; in- troduction 4: question 4 and.

6. And thus the question and elucid- ation with reference to three only (of which the Pradhana is not one) (is con- sistent). |

In the Katha Upanishad Nachiketas asks Yama three questions only, viz. about the fire (sacrifice), the individual soul, and the Supreme Self. The Pradhana is not mentioned. So we cannot expect Yama to go out of his way and treat of the Pradhana, which has not been inquired into.

AES i 9 ll aeeq Like Mahat 4 and.

7. And like Mahat (the word ‘Avyakta’ does not refer to any Sankhyan category).

The Mahat according to the Sankhyas means the first-born, the cosmic intelligence; but in the Vedic texts it is associated with the word ‘Self’. Passages like ‘The Mahat (Great) is superior to the intellect’ (Kath. 1. 8. 10), clearly show that it is used in a different sense from the intellect and refer to the

1.4.8] _ BRAHMA-SUTRAS AB?

Self in different aspects. Similarly though the Avyakta in the Sankhya philosophy may mean the Pradhana or Prakriti, in the Sruti texts it means something different. So the Pradhdna is not based on scriptural authority but is a mere inferred thing.

Upanishad is not the Sdnkhyan Pradhdna.

In the last topic the opponent was refuted on the ground that the mere mention of the word “Avyakta’ was not sufficient reason to identify it as the Sankhyan category calied the Pradhéna. The opponent here gives more analogies from the Sruti texts to uphold his view.

anaaa aay |< tt

‘aaaaq Like the bow! wiaimq for want of special characteristics.

8. (The word ‘Aja cannot be asserted to mean the Pradhana) for want of special characteristics, as in the case of the bowl.

“There is one Aja, red, white, and black producing manifold offspring of the same appearance (colour)’’ (Svet. 4. 5). The question is whether this ‘Aja’ refers to the Sankhya category Prakriti or to the fine elements fire, water, and earth. The Sankhyas hold that ‘Aja’ here means the Pradhana, the unborn; and red, white, and black refer to its three constituents, the Gunas—Sattva, Rajas, and

Tamas. This Sutra refutes this, saying that in the absence of special characteristics there is no basis for such a special assertion. The text can be interpreted otherwise also. ‘‘There is a bow! that has its opening below and bulging at the top’ (Brih. 2. 2. 8). It is impossible to decide from the text itself what kind of bowl is meant. So also it is impossible to fix the meaning of ‘Aja’ from the text alone. As in the case of the bowl the complementary texts fix what kind of bowl is meant, so also here we have to refer this passage to supplementary scriptural texts to fix the meaning of ‘Aja’ and not assert that it means the Pradhana.

satfaaamnar q, aut endtaa o& | & 1

SH ASIA (Elements) beginning with light q but aa so fF because WHA read TA some.

9. But (the elements) beginning with light (are meant by the word Aja), because some read so.

Tue Chhandogya assigns to the elements fire, water, and earth, created by the Lord, red, white, and black colours. Vide Cth, &. 2. 2-4 and 6. 4. 1.

This passage fixes the meaning of the word ‘Aja’ here. It refers to the three elementary substances viz. fire, earth, and water, from which the rest of the creation has been produced. It is not the Prakriti of the Sankhyas consisting of the three Gunas. In the former interpretation the three colours

1.4.10] BRAHMA-SUTRAS | 139

can be taken in their primary sense, whereas they can represent. the three Gunas in a secondary sense only. Moreover, the force of the recognition of the Sruti is stronger; that is to say, if we can beyond doubt recognize in this passage what is elsewhere mentioned in the Sruti, that will be more reasonable than to rezognize categories of a Smriti in the Sruti texts.

RoaTqera maafsae far: Non

aaatqend Instruction having been given through 4 and imagery aaifeaq as in the case of ‘honey’ etc. wfaity: no incongruity.

10. And instruction having been given through the imagery (of a goat) (there is) no incongruity, (even) as in the case of ‘honey’ (standing for the sun in Madhuvidya for the purpose of devout meditation) and such other cases.

The word ‘Aja’ refers to something unborn; so how can it refer to the three causal elements of the Chhandogya, which are something created? It is incongruous, says the objector.

There is no incongruity in it, answers the Sutra, as the elements are spoken of through the imagery of a she-goat (Aja). Even as the sun in Madhu- vidya is represented as honey in the text, “The sun indeed in the honey’’ (Chh. 3. 1. 1), so also are the three elementary substances of the Chhandogya

represented as the goat. A she-goat may be black, white, and red, and may give birth to offspring representing her in colour. Similarly out of the combination of fire, water, and earth, having red, white, and black colours respectively, are produced all the inanimate and animate beings of similar colours. The combination of the fine elements, fire, water, and earth is here spoken of by the imagery of a tri-coloured goat, and that is why it is called an Aja, which does not however mean unborn.

are not the twenty-five Sdnkhyan categories.

a deaqaaerata, ararararafateresz ti 22 I

4 Not wenqereieia even from the statement of the number a7waT4q on account of the differences wfatary on account of the excess @ and.

11. Even from the statement of the number (fivefold five, 7.e. twenty-five cate- gories, by the Sruti, it is) not (to be presumed that the Sruti refers to the Pradhana) on account of the differences (in the categories) and the excess (over the number of the Sankhyan categories).

‘‘That in which the five groups of five and the (subtle) ether are placed, that very Atman’’ etc. (Brih. 4. 4. 17). Now five times five makes twenty- five, which is exactly the number of the Sankhyan

1.4.13] BRAHMA-SUTRAS: 141

categories. So the Sankhyas say that here is the scriptural authority for their philosophy. This Sutra refutes such an assumption. For the Sankhyan categories cannot be divided into groups of five on any basis of similarity, for all the twenty-five categories differ from each other. Secondly, the mention of the ether in tue text as a separate category would make the number twenty-six in all, contrary to the Sankhyan theory.

STOTT ATHANAT tt 22 tt

yrmey: The vital force etc. aie because of the complementary passage.

12. (The five people referred to are) the vital force etc., because (we. find it to be so) from the complementary passage.

‘“‘They who know the vital force of the vital force, the eye of the eye, the ear of the ear, the food of the food, the mind of the mind,’’ etc. (Brih. Madhy. 4. 4. 21). The ‘five people’ refer to this vital force and the other four of the text, which are cited to describe Brahman.

SRATRTAATA I 23 Ul

alfa By light wena of some waft VW food not being mentioned. ‘

13. (In the text) of some (the Kanva recension) food not being mentioned (in

the complementary passage referred to in the previous Sutra) (the number is made up) by ‘light’ (mentioned in the previous verse).

‘That immortal Light of lights the gods worship as longevity”? (Brih. 4. 4. 16). Though food is not mentioned in the text cited in the last Sutra according ‘to the Kanva recension of the Satapatha Brahmana, yet the four of that verse, together with ‘light’ mentioned in the text cited above, would make the ‘five people’.

as regards the fact that Brahman is the First Cause.

In the last three topics it has been shown that the Pradhana of the Saénkhyas is not based on the scriptures, and consequently it was established that all the Sruti texts refer to Brahman as the First Cause. The opponent now tries to show that as the Vedanta texts contradict each other with respect to the order of creation, they are therefore of doubtful import, and consequently it is safer to accept the Pradhana, which is established by reason and infer- ence, as the First Cause.

Aaa Arafsy warsqassts: | 2s tl

anuaa ‘As the (First) Cause wand srarufeg as regards ether and so on au aafeein: being represent- ed ( in other texts ) as taught (in one text).

1.4.15] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 143

i4, (Although) as regards (things created, like) ether and so on (the Vedanta texts differ), (yet there is no such conflict with respect to Brahman) as the First Cause, (on account of Its) being repre- sented (in other texts) as taught (in one text).

The Sankhyas contend that though the Pradhina cannot be the First Cause according to the Sruti, yet Brahman also cannot be taken to be the First Cause taught by the Sruti. Why? Because there is conflict as regards the order of creation; for some texts say that it is Akasa that was first produced from Brahman, some say that it is Prana, Others that it is fire. This Sutra says that though there are conflicting views with respect to things created, that is, as regards the order of creation, yet since it is not the main object of the Sruti to teach about creation, it matters little. The main object in these descriptions is to teach that Brahman is the First Cause, and with respect to this there is no conflict; for every Vedanta text holds that Brahman is that.

AATHAMT tt VY tl

15. On account of the connection (with passage referring to Brahman, non- existence does not mean absolute non- existence).

A further objection is raised that even as regards the First Cause there is a conflict, for some texts say that the Self created these worlds (Ait. Ar. 2. 4. 1. 2-8), others say that creation originated from non-existence (Taitt. 2. 7). Again existence is taught as the First Cause in some texts (Chh. 6. 2. 1-2). Spontaneous creation also is taught by some texts (Brih. 1. 4. 7). On account of these conflicting texts it cannot be said that all the Vedanta texts refer to Brahman uniformly as the First Cause. These objections are answered as follows: ‘‘This was indeed non-existence in the beginning’? (Taitt. 2. 7). Non-existence here does not mean absolute non- existence but undifferentiated existence. Existence was at the beginning undifferentiated into name and form. In the texts of the Taittirrya Upanishad Brahman is definitely described as not being non- existence. ‘‘He who knows Brahman as _ non- existing becomes himself non-existing. He who knows Brahman as existing is known by sages as existing’ (Taitt. 2. 6). This Brahman is again de- scribed as having wished to be many and created this world. Again ‘‘How can that which is be created from non-existence??? (Chh. 6. 2. 2) clearly denies such a possibility. ‘‘Now this was then undifferen- tiated’? (Brih. 1. 4. 7), does not speak of spontaneous creation without a ruler, for it is connected with another passage where it is said, “‘He has entered here to the very tips of the finger-nails’’ (Brih. 1. 4. 7), where ‘He’ refers to this ruler, and hence we have

1.4.16] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 145

to take that the Lord, the ruler, developed what was undeveloped. Siraiiarly Brahman, which is described in une place as existence, is referred to in another place as being the Self of all by the word ‘Atman’. So all texts uniformly point to Brahman as the First Cause, and there is no conflict as regards this.

moou, etc., ie Brahman and not Préna (the vital force) ur the individual soul.

In the last topic the word ‘existence’ occurring in one passage helped us to interpret non-existence occurring in another passage as undifferentiated exist- ence and not absolute non-existence. But the opponent now takes up for Ciscussion texts where the words ‘Prana’ etc. cannot be reasonably interpreted to mean #rahman, though It is mentioned in another

text. ATATaCATS tt LE

aaq—atfaate Because ( it ) denotes the world.

16. (He of whom all this is the work is Brahman) because (the work) denotes the world.

‘““He, O Balaki, who is the maker of these persons (whom you mentioned), and whose work this is—is alone to be known’’ (Kau, 4. 19). In this section Balaki first describes the several individual souls residing in the sun, moon, ether, etc. as

Brahman. Ajatasatru says that these are not the true Brahman and proceeding to teach the real Brahman says, ‘‘He who is the maker of these persons is alone to be known and not these persons.’’? Here who is the maker of the sun, moon, etc. is the question. The opponent holds he is either the chief Prana or the individual soul. He is the chief Prana, for the activity of motion connected with work refers to Prana, and Prana is also mentioned in a comple- mentary passage: ‘Then he becomes one with that Prana alone”? (Kau. 4. 20). It may also be the Jiva, for in ‘‘As the master feeds with his people... thus does the conscious self feed with the other selfs’’ (Kau. 4. 20) it is referred to. The Sutra refutes all this and says it is Brahman that is referred to by ‘maker’ in the text; for Brahman is taught here. I shall teach you Brahman.’ Again ‘this’, which means the world, is his work—which clearly points out that the ‘he’ is none other than Brahman. Therefore the maker is neither Prana nor _ the individual soul, but the Supreme Lord.

shaqgeannfasrata Aq, agatearaq i 29 tl

sla-qeama-fagiq On account of characteristics of the individual soul and the chief Prana 4 not sfa aq if it be said aq that =@renaq has already been explained.

17. Ifit be said that on account of the characteristics of the individual soul and

1.4.18] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 147

the chief Prana (to be found in the text, Brahman is) not (referred to by the word ‘maker’ in the passage cited), (we reply) that has already been explained.

See note on 1. 1. &1.

say q Stata: sasareatarearata GaAAF 112i

wneq For another purpose 4 but Sfafa: Jaimini waqenareary because of the question and elucidation wig @ moreover Uaq thus “& some.

18. But (the sage) Jaimini (thinks that the reference to the individual soul in the text) has another purpose because of the question and answer; moreover thus some (the Vajasaneyins) (read in their recension).

Even the reference to the individual soul in the said chapter of the Kaushitaki Upanishad has a different purpose, and that is not to propound the individual soul but Brahman by showing that the individual soul is different from Brahman. The questions, ‘Where did the person thus sleepP Where was he? Whence came he thus back?”’ (Kau. 4. 19) refer clearly to something different from the individual soul. And so does the answer (Ibid. 4. 20) say that the individual soul is merged in Brahman in deep sleep. The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, where also this conversation occurs, clearly points out the

individual soul by the term ‘Vijnfnamaya’, the person consisting of cognition, and distinguishes it from the Supreme Self. (Brih. 2. 1. 16-17).

is Brahman.

In the last topic the text under discussion was interpreted to refer to Brahman, because the section begins with Brahman: ‘‘I will teach you Brahman.”’ Following the same argument the opponent cites Brih. 2. 4. 5 and argues that since the section begins with the individual soul, the self to be seen referred to in this text is the individual soul and not Brahman.

ATFITATY 1 LE Il

ara-weaate On account of the connected meaning of passages.

19. (The Self to be seen, to be heard, etc. is Brahman) on account of the con- nected meaning of the passages.

The Self, my dear Maitreyi, should be realized

—should be heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon. By the realization of the Self, my dear, through hearing, reflection, and meditation, all this is known’”’ (Brih. 2. 4. 5). In this passage the Supreme Self is referred to, and not the individual soul. Why? In the whole section Brahman is treated. It begins with Maitreyi’s question ‘‘Will wealth get me immortality??? and Ydajnavalkya answers that

1.4.20] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 149

wealth, sacrifice, etc. will not obtain that immortal- ity. She then asks for that which will give her immortality, and YAajnavalkya teaches her the knowledge of the Self; finally the section concludes with, ‘“Lhus far goes immortality.”” Now immortal- ity cannot be gained by the knowledge of the individual soul, but only by the knowledge of the Supreme Self or Brahman. Therefore Brahman alone is the subject-matter and It alone is to be seen through hearing etc. Moreover, the text quoted says that by the knowledge of the Self spoken of there, everything is known, which clearly connects the Self referred to with Brahman; for how can the knowledge of a limited individual self give us knowledge oi everything?

ofamrfasegntawea: | Ro 1

ufasn-fay: Of the proof of the proposition farq indicatory mark Wawa: Asmarathya.

20. (The fact that the individual soul is taught as the object of realization is an) indicatory mark (which is) proof of the proposition, so Asmarathya thinks.

In this Sutra the text quoted in the last Sutra (Brih. 2. 4. 5) is interpreted from the standpoint of Bhedabheda-vada of sage Asmarathya. Accord- ing to this school the individual soul (Jiva) and Brahman, which are related as effect and cause respectively, are different, yet not different, from

each other, even as sparks are different, yet not different, from fire. If the individual soul (Jiva) were quite different from Brahman, then by the knowledge of the one (Brahman) everything else would not be known. Hence this school interprets the text thus: The individual soul alone is to be seen. But as it is not different from Brahman, the knowledge of the individual soul gives knowledge of Brahman and consequently knowledge of everything. It is this non-difference between Brahman and the individual soul (Jiva) that establishes the proposition, ‘‘By the knowledge of one everything else is known’’, and in this sense alone the text speaks of the individual soul in Brih. 2. 4. 5.

It can also be interpreted as follows. If the individual soul is something different from Brahman, then the knowledge of Brahman would not give the knowledge of the individual soul. Therefore the individual soul is different, yet not different, from Brahman. It is to show this that the Sruti text begins with the individual soul.

soniqera ostratigentgatfa: 1 82

senfaea: Of the one which rises from the body ud war because of this nature %fa thus wWeenfa: (the sage) Audulomi.

21. (The statement at the beginning identifies the individual soul with Brah- man) because of this nature (viz. its

1.4.22] BRALIMA-SUTRAS 151

identity with Brahman) of the one (ie. the soul) which rises from the body (at the time of release), thus (thinks) Audulomi.

This Acharya, while taking that the self to be seen is the individual soul (Jiva), explains it as follows: The soul, when it rises from the body, i.e. 185 free and has no pody consciousness, realizes that it is identical with Brahman. It is to show this non-difference in the state of release that the Sruti speaks of the individual soul as identical with Brahman, even though the difference hetween the individual soul (Jiva) and Brahman in the state of ignorance is a reality. It is spoken of as non-different from the Supreme Self or Brahmun because in the state of release it is one with It. The text transfers the future state of non-difference to that time when difference actually exists. This schoo] of Vedanta is known as Satya-bheda-vada (i.e. the theory which holds that the difference between the individual soul and Brahman is a reality).

stafeuaicfa areracea: tl 22 I

wafeat: Because of the existence ¢fa so holds arumea: K asakritsna.

22. (The initial statement is made) because of, the existence (of Brahman as the individual soul), so holds (sage) Kasakritsna.

1$2 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [1.4.22

As it is impossible that an individual soul (Jiva) quite different in nature from Brahman can be one with it in the state of release, this sage thinks.that the Supreme Self Itself exists as the individual soul. They are absolutely. non-different, the apparent difference being due to Upadhis or limiting adjuncts, which are but products of ignorance, and therefore unreal from the absolute standpoint. Hence also follows that by the knowledge of Brahman every- thing else is known.

Of the three schools of Vedanta depicted in the last three Sutras, that of Kasakritsna is justified by the Vedanta texts. According to Asmarathya the individual soul is a product of the Supreme Self, and hence the knowledge of the cause leads to the knowledge of everything including the individual soul. But is the effect or any portion of it different from the cause? And is the whole cause involved in each of its effects? The answer to the second question is evidently, no. If the effect or some portion of it is different from this cause, whence does it come? And is it separable from that? If separable, it is not its nature, for nature cannot be separated. If not separable, the cause cannot be known, and the proposition, ‘The soul being known, all else is known’’, falls to the ground. So Asma-

rathya’s view cannot stand.

According to Audulomi the individual soul (Jiva) is Only a state of the Supreme Self. If the Jivahood is a reality, it can never be destroyed and freedom

1.4.28] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 153

would be impossible. If on the other hand it becomes one with the Supreme Soul on release, then there. is nothing like Jivanood which can be a reality. So Audulomi’s view cannot stand. Jivahood is an unreality, a creation of ignorance, the Jiva being identical with Brahman. Even the creation of Jivas like sparks issuing from a fire does not speak of any real creation but only witi reference to Upadhis. In reality the Jiva is neither created nor destroyed. It is our ignorance that makes us see the individual soul (Jiva) limited by Upadhis as something different from Brahman.

of the world,

cafe sfaargsrargactaray i 23 tt

afd: Material cause 4 also afasn-eerraquang not being contradictory to the proposition and illustra- tions.

23. (Brahman is) the material cause also, (on account of this view alone) not being contradictory to the proposition and the illustrations (cited in the Sruti).

Granted that Brahman is the cause of the world; but what kind of cause? Is It the efficient cause, or the material cause, or both? The prima facie view is that Brahman is only the efficient cause, as texts like ‘‘He thought,... he created Prana’? (Pr. 6. 3-4) declare.

This view is refuted by this Sutra. Brahman is also the material cause of the world. Here ‘also’ shows that it is the efficient cause as well. It is only if Brahman is the material cause of the world that it is possible to know everything through the knowledge of Brahman, as texts like “‘By which that which is not heard becomes heard’’ ete. (Chh. 6. 1. 8) say; for the effects are not different from the cause. The illustrations referred to are: ‘‘My dear, as by one lump of clay all that is made of clay is known’’ etc. (Chh. 6. 1. 4). These texts clearly show that Brahman is the material cause of the world; otherwise they would be meaningless. Again texts like ‘‘Brahman alone was at the beginning one without a second’’ show that It is also the efficient cause, for who else could be such a cause when there was nothing else?

afeatgs NTS |] 22 I

ufraiqésr On account of the statement of will (to create) 4 also.

24. Also on account of the statement of will (to create on the part of the Supreme Self, It is the material cause).

“It wished, ‘May I be many, may I grow forth’ ”’ etc. (Chh. 6. 2. 3). In this text the desire shows that Brahman is the efficient cause, and next ‘may I be many’ intimates that Brahman Itself became many. Hence It is the material cause as well.

1.4.26] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 155

AMAT ATAA, tl 2% Ul

Wag Goieune and s#aqarra because the Sruti states both.

25. And because the Sruti states that both (the creation and the dissolution of the world) (have Brahman as) the direct (cause).

That from which a thing springs and into which it is re-absorbed is its material cause. ‘‘All these things spring from Akasa (Brahman) alone and return to Akasa’? (Chh.!. 9. 1), ‘“That from which these things are produced, by which, when produced, they live, and into which they enter at their dissolu- tion—try to know that. ‘That is Brahman’’ (Taitt. 3.1). These texts show that Brahman is the material cause also. A thing may be said to be produced from its efficient cause, but it cannot return to that at dissolution unless it is also the material cause.

srenmea: Tora) RE A

Wiad: As It created Itself ufvwma by undergoing modification.

26. (Brahman is the material cause of the world) because (the Sruti says that) It created Itself by undergoing modifica- tions.

“That Itself manifested Itself’? (Taitt. 2. 7), which shows that Brahman alone created the world,

out of Itself, which is possible only by undergoing modification. The word ‘Itself? in the text shows that there was no other cause operating. The modifi- cation is apparent according to Sankara and real according to Ramanuja.

aifeer fe tat 1 29 0 atfa: Origin 4 and fe because @@ is called.

27. And because (Brahman) is called the origin.

‘‘That which the wise regard as the origin of all beings’? (Mu. 1. 1. 6)—this shows that Brahman is the material cause of the world. Hence Its being the material cause is established.

Sdnkhyas refute also others.

OAT GA ATETNAT SITSATAT: th Re I waa By this a¢ all serm: are explained.

28. By this all (doctrines with refer- ence to the origin of the world contrary to the Vedanta texts) are explained.

By this identity of the material and the efficient cause of the world all doctrines that speak of two separate causes for it are refuted. That is, not only the Sankhyan, but also the atomic and other theories are refuted, as they are not based on scriptural

1.4.28]. BRAHMA-SUTRAS 157

authority and contradict many scriptural texts. The repetition of the verb in the aphorism only shows that the chapter ends here.

Those who hold the atomic theory, or who say that the First Cause is non-existence, or that it Is Sunya (Void)—as the Nihilists say—cite respectively the following texts as authority. ‘‘These seeds, almost infinitesimal’? (Chh. 6. 12. 1); ‘“This was indeed non-existent at the beginning’? (Chh. 8. 19. 1); ‘“‘Some learned men being deluded, speak of nature, and others of time, as the cause of everything”’ (Svet. 6. 1). But the arguments put forward against the Sankhyas, viz. that contrary to the scriptures their First Cause is insentient, that tne proposition that through the knowledge of the one everything is known, will not be true, etc. will apply here elso, and so these views cannot be held to be authorita- tive and based on the scriptures. The Srutis quoted are explained thus:

The word ‘infinitesimal’ or ‘atomic’ refers to the Atman, which can be so-called as it is very fine. The non-existence spoken of is only a fine causal condi- tion of the world undeveloped into name and form as yet, and not absolute non-existence; and the fact of nature being the First Cause is mentioned as a Purvapaksha by the Sruti, which itself refutes it further on in the succeeding texts. So Brahman alone is the First Cause, and nothing else.


CHAPTER II
----------

[Section I]

In the first chapter it has been proved that al} the Vedanta texts deal with Brahman as the First Cause, vet the arguments based on reasoning against this doctrine remain to be refuted. With this object in view this section is begun. In section 1v_ of Chapter I it was shown that the Pradhana of the Sankhyas, as also the atoms of the Vauseshikas, are not based on scriptural authority. In this section arguments, claiming their authoritativeness from the Smritis, to establish the Pradhana and the atoms etc., are refuted.

on the Srutis.

eqrTHTagaag tf Be, 4, AUTH INNA tt EU afa-aaaaia-ciayes: There would result the defect of leaving no scope for certain Smritis fa 44 if it be said 4 no Waafa-qaama-eisneeiaq because there would result the defect of leaving no scope to some other Smritis. 1. If it be said that (from the doctrine of Brahman being the cause of the world) there would result the defect

2.1.2]: BRAHMA-SUTEAS 159

of leaving no scope for certain Smirits, (we say) no; because (by the rejection of that doctrine) there would result the defect of leaving no scope for some other Smritis.

In the last chapter it has been shown that the Sankhyan view is not based on scriptural authority. Now its authority even us a Smriti is denicd and refuted.

If the doctrine of the Pradhana is rejected, then the Sankhya Smriti, propounded by a great seer like Kapila and acknowledged by other great thinkers, would ccase to be authoritative: heiice it is but reason- able that the Vedanta texts be so interpreted as to preserve the authorilativeness of this Smriti and not contradict it m toto. So says the opponent. The Sutra answers this by saying that if the doctrine of Brahman being the cause of the world be rejected to accommodate the Sankhya Smriti, which goes counter to the Srutis, then by that rejection many other Smritis like the Manu Smriti, which are based on the Srutis and therefore more authoritative, and, which also propound the doctrine of Brahman, an intelligent principle, being the cause of the world, would find no scope. So between the two it is desirable that the Smritis which go counter to the Vedas be rejected.

TATTT ATAGH=A: | 2 I

savst Of the others 4 and Sqv#4: there being no mention.

2. And there being no mention (in the scriptures) of the other entities, (1.e. the categories beside the Pradhana), (the Sankhya system cannot be authoritative).

Even accepting the Pradhana of the Sankhyas for argument’s sake—for the Vedantins also recognize Maya as the cause of the world, the difference be- tween the two being that the Pradhana according to the Sankhyas is an independent entity, whereas Maya is a dependent entity, being a power of Brahman— yet there is no mention of the other categories of the Sankhyas anywhere in the Vedas. Hence the Sankhya philosophy cannot be authoritative.

Gat WT: TAH: | 3 I uaa By this aa: the Yoga philosophy 44: is (also) refuted. 7 3. By this the Yoga philosophy is (also) refuted.

After the refutation of the Sankhyas, who recog- nize an independent entity called the Pradhana as the cause of the world, this Sutra refutes the Yoga Smriti, which also recognizes a separate entity called the Pradh4na as the First Cause, though unlike the Sankhyas they recognize an Iswara who directs this inert Pradhana in its creative evolution. The Yoga system is spoken of in Upanishads like the Svetas- vatara. It helps concentration of the mind, which

2.1.4] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 161

is necessary for the ivll comprehension of Brahman, and &s such it is a means to Knowledge. So this Smriti, being based on the Siutis is authoritative. But it also recognizes the Pradhana, which therefore is the First Causc—so says the opponent. This Sutra says that the arguments given in the last Sutra refute also the Yoga Smriti, for it also speaks of a Pradhana and its products which are not to be found ir the Srutis. Though the Smriti is partly authoritative, yet it vannot be so with respect to that part which contradicts the Srutis. There is room only for those portions of the Smriti as do not contradict the Srutis.

from the wertd, can yet be its cause.

a froancareen, auc AT MATT HS I

a+ Noc fawewary because of the contrary nature wa of this #44 its being so 4 and weiq from Sruti.

4. (Brahman is) not (the cause of the world) because this (world) is of a contrary nature (from Brahman); and its being so, (2. e. different from Brahman) (is known) from the scriptures.

Brahman is intelligence, pure, etc., while the world is something material, impure, etc., and so is different from the nature of Brahman; as _ such, Brahman cannot be the cause of this world. The effect is nothing but the cause in another form; there- fore the cause and effect cannot be altogether of a

different nature. Intelligence cannot produce material effects and vice versa. That the world and Brahman differ entirely in their characteristics is known from texts like ‘‘Brahman became intelligence as also non-intelligent’’ (Taitt. 2. 6), where ‘‘non-intelligent”’ stands for the world. So Brahman cannot be the First Cause of the material world, though the script- ures may say so.

afaaracsaqaaeg faatraarfaeansy iS tl

wfwefaaqen: The reference ‘is) to the presiding deities ¢ but faie-sqafaenq because of the special characterization and the fact of being so presided.

5. But the reference is to the presid- ing deities (of the organs) on account of the special characterization (as ‘deities’) and also from the fact of a deity so presid- ing (over the functions of an organ being approved by the Sruti in other texts).

The opponent, who says that the world and Brahman being different in nature—sensient and material respectively—cannot be related to each other as cause and effect, anticipates a plausible objection and answers it in this Sutra. There is a text, “These organs quarrelling over their respective greatness,’’ etc. (Brih. 6. 1. 7), which shows that even the organs are not material but sentient. The opponent says that from this we are not to infer the sentiency of the world, since the reference is to the

2.1.6] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 163

presiding deities of these organs. For the same topic occurs in the Kausnitaki Upanishad, where they are expressly mentioned. ‘‘These deities (speech etc.) quarrelling over their respective greatness’? (Kau. 2. 14). Also because other texts slow the exist- ence of such presiding deities. ‘‘Fire becoming speech entered the mouth’’ (Ait. Ar. 2. 4. 2. 4). The same argument applies to texts of the Chhandogya, Ch. VI, where fire ete. are said to have thought and produced the next element in the series. The thought here spoken of is of the highest Deity, Brahman, which is connected with Its effects as a superintend- ing principle. From all such texts we cannot infer the sentiency of the world, which is material and so different in nature from Brahman. Therefore Brah- man cannot be the cause of the material world.

gaa Tuk zzaad Is seen § but. 6. But it is seen.

‘But’ refutes the opponent’s view expressed in the last Sutra, wiz. that this world cannot have originated from Brahman because it is different in character. For it is seen that intelligent things like scorpions etc. are produced from non-intelligent cowdung etc. Again from a sentient spider there comes forth the‘thread for its web. So also do nails, hair, etc. come forth from a man, who is an intelli- gent being. Therefore it is quite possible that this

material world could be produced by an intelligent Being, Brahman. It may be objected that a man’s body is the cause of the hair and nails, and not the man; similarly the cowdung is the cause of the body of the worms. Even then it must be admitted that there is a difference between the cause and the effect since, in both the examples cited, one of them is the abode of something sentient while the other is not; they are not similar in all respects. If they were, then there would be nothing like cause and effect, nor would they be called by different names. So we have to admit that the cause and its effects are not similar in every respect, but something in the cause, or some qualities of it, must be found in the effects also, as the clay in the lump is found in the pot also, though the shape etc. of the two differ. So we say that even in the case of Brahman and the world, some qualities of the cause, Brahman, such as existence and intelligence, are to be found in its effect, the world.: Everything in the world exists, and this quality it gets from Brahman, which is existence itself. Again the intelligence of Brahman lights the whole universe. So these two qualities of Brahman are found in the world, which justify our relating them as cause and effect in spite of differences iA other respects between them.

sefafa Sa, a, tfatararsacara tt 9 1

waq Non-existent vfa 94 if it be said 4 no sfate- aaa for it is merely a negation.

2.1.8] BRAHMA-SUTEAS 165

7. If it be said (that the world, the effect, would tien be) non-existent (before creation), (we say) no, for it is merely a negation (without any basis).

If Brahman, which is intelligent, pure, and with- out qualities, is the cause of the world of an opposite character, it follows that before creation the world was non-existent, for Brahman was then the only existence. This means that something which was non-existing is brought into existence, which is not accepted by the Vedantins. This argument of the opponent this Sutra refutes by saying that this nega- tion is a mere statcment without any objective valid- ity. The effect exists in the cause hefore its origina- tion as well as after it. It can never exist independ- ent of the cause either before or after creation. Therefore the world exists in Brahman even before creation and is not absolutely non-existent.

APA AAARTTAARAT Ul < It wadt At the time of dissolution aq like that Wa" on account of the fact Wass is absurd.

8. On account of the fact that at the time of dissolution (the cause becomes) like that (1. e., like the effect) (the doctrjne of Brahman being the cause of the a, is absurd.

Says the opponent: If Brahman is the cause of the world, then the world being dissolved in Brahman

at the time of dissolution, its defects would affect Brahman, even as salt affects the water in which it is dissolved. Hence Brahman would become impure and would no more be the omniscient cause of the world, as the Upanishads maintain. Again at the time of dissolution all things having gone into a state of oneness with Brahman, there will be no special causes left for a new creation. If in spite of this we - consider a new creation possible, then it would mean that there is a chance of even the liberated souls, who have become one with Brahman, reappearing in the world. Nor can it be said that the world remains separate from Brahman in the state of dissolution, for in that case it would be no dissolution at all. So the Vedanta doctrine of Brahman being the cause of the world is objectionable, as it leads to all sorts of absurdities.

Td, eateadyraned tl € ll 4 Not g but ECAR on account of the exist-

ence of illustrations.

9. But not (so) on account of the existence of illustrations.

The objection is being answered: That the effect, when it gets dissolved in the cause, does not pollute the latter by its defects, is borne out by innumerable instances. A clay pot, for instance, when it is broken and reabsorbed into its original substance, 7.€. clay, does not impart to it its special features. The very fact of absorption shows that all

2.1.9] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 167

the qualities of the effect cannct abide, for in that case it would be rv ubsorption at ali. Moreover, we have to remember that the effect is of the nature of the cause and not vice versa. Hence the qualities of the effect cannot touch the cause. Jt may, however, be objected that since the effect is but the cause in a new condition, all the good and bad traits of the effect must have been in the cause. But we forget that the world is after all un illusion. Brahman has only apparently changed into the world and as such is never affected by it, even as a magician is not affected by the illusion produced by him.

The other incongruity shown, viz. that since at the time of dissolution the woild is resolved into Brahman and becomes one with It, there can be no further creation, and if it takes place there will be the possibility of even free souls coming into bondage again, cannot stand, for there are parallel instances with respect to this also. In deep sleep we do not perceive anything, there 1s no diversity, but on awakening we find the world of duality. <A similar phenomenon can be expected to happen at the time of dissolution. In the former case it is the existence of ignorance (Avidya), which is not destroyed, that is responsible for the reappearance of the world. So also at dissolution the power of distinction remains in a potential state as Avidya or ignorance. But in the case of the liberated no ignorance being left, there is no chance of their being brought back into bondage from their state of oneness with Brahman.

WTR |] Lo |

aqa-2imq Because of the objections to his own view 4 and.

10. And because of the objections (cited) (being applicable) to his own (Sankhyan) view (also). | The objections raised by the Sankhyas against

Vedanta are equally true of their view of the First Cause, viz. the Pradhana. Form, taste, etc. are not to be found in the Pradhana, yet we find these things in the world produced out of it. The objection as regards reabsorption at the time of Pralaya applies also in the case of the SAnkhyan Pradhana. Thus whatever objections are raised against Vedanta in this respect are also true of the Sankhyas. Hence they should be dropped. Of the two, however, Vedanta being based on the Srutis is more authorita- tive. Moreover, the“objections have all been answered from the Vedanta standpoint, whereas from the Sankhyan standpoint it is not possible to answer

them. antnfasineaty; acauigrafafa aq, mance feratearag: 2k

aa-safasit Because reasoning has no_ sure basis “fa also wae otherwise W#7q should be in- ferred or reasoned %fa @q if it be said waq so wa even “fattener: there will result the contingency of non-release.

2.1.11] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 169

11. Also because reasoning has no sure basis (it cannot upset the conclusions of Vedanta). If it be said that it should be reasoned otherwise (so as to get over this defect), (we say) even so there will result the contingency of non-release (from this defect, with respect to the matter in question).

What one man establishes through reason can be refuted by another more intelligent than he. Even a sage like Kapila is i1efuted by other sages like Kanada. Hence reasoning having no sure basis can- not upset the conclusions of Vedanta, which are based on the Srutis. But, says the opponent, even this judgment about reasoning is arrived at through reasoning; so it is not true that reasoning has never a sure basis. Sometimes it is perfectly sound. Only we must reason properly. The latter part of the Sutra says that even though in some cases reasoning is infallible, yet with respect to the matter in hand it cannot transcend this defect. For the cause of the world (Brahman) is beyond the senses and has no characteristic signs. It cannot therefore be an object of perception, or of inference, which is based on perception. Or again if we take ‘release’ in the Sutra to mean Liberation, it comes to this: True knowl- edge of a real:thing depends on the thing itself, and therefore it is always uniform. Hence a conflict of views with respect to it is not possible. But the

conclusions of reasoning can never be uniform. The Sankhyas arrive through reasoning at the Pradhana as the First Cause, while the Naiydayikas (logicians) mention Paramanus (atoms) as that. Which to accept? So no conclusion can be arrived at through reasoning independent of the scriptures, and since the truth cannot be known through this means, there will be no Liberation. Therefore reasoning which goes against the scriptures is no proof of knowledge and cannot contradict the Sruti texts.

is valid also against others like the Atomists.

waa fasrafeaer aia sarearan: tt 22 tl

uda By this frerftaer not accepted by the wise wit also arena: are explained.

12. By this (2.e. by the arguments against the Sankhyas) (those other views) also not accepted by the wise (like Manu and others) are explained.

When the Sankhya philosophy, parts of which are accepted by the wise as authoritative, has been refuted, there is no question as regards the non- authoritativeness of all doctrines based merely on reasoning like the atomic theory of Kanada and non- existence as the First Cause propounded by the Buddhists, which are wholly rejected by the wise. They are also refuted by these very arguments against

2.1.18] BRAiIMA-SUTRAS 172

the Sankhyas, as the reasons on which the refutation is based are the seine.

do wot contradict the truth which is oneness.

atarqacrarrsag, SEH | 83.

Wage: On acccunt of turning into the enjoyer wfaeia: non-distinction ¥q if it be said Bq may exist @aaq as is experienced in the world.

13. If it be said (that if Brahman be the cause then) on account of (the objects of enjoyment) turning into the enjoyer, non-distinction (between enjoyer and things enjoyed would result), (we say, such distinction) may exist (all the same), as is experienced commonly in the world.

A further objection is raised against Brahman being the cause. We perceive differences in the world. Now, perception as a means of knowledge. is stronger than the Sruti. Hence what the Srutis say in contradiction to such an experience cannot stand. The idea is this: The distinction between the enjoyer (the Jiva) and the objects of enjoyment is well established by experience. If Brahman is the material cause, then the world, the effect, would be non-different from Brahman, and under the circum- stances, the Jiva and Brahman being identical in Vedanta, the difference between the subject and

object would be destroyed, since the one would pass over into the other. Hence Brahman cannot be held to be the material cause of the world as it contradicts perception.

The latter part of the Sutra refutes this giving examples. It says that nevertheless there can be such differences in non-different things. For instance, waves, foam, etc. are non-different, being alike sea ‘water; yet as waves and foam they are different from each other. As sea water, their cause, they are one, but as waves, foam, etc. they are different, and there is no contradiction here. Hence it is possi- ble to have difference and non-difference in things simultaneously, owing to name and form. Therefore from the standpoint of Brahman the enjoyer and the enjoyed are not different, but as enjoyer and things enjoyed they are different; there is no contradiction in this.

The Sutra can also be interpreted otherwise. If Brahman be the cause, then It would also be the enjoyer, the individual soul (Jiva), there being no difference between cause and effect. Consequently, there will be no such difference as the bondage of the individual soul and the freedom of Brahman. The Sutra says that even as there is a distinction between the object, which is clear, and its image, which is disfigured in an unclean mirror, so also owing to the impurities of the Antahksrana (mind) the ever-free Brahman may give rise to the image of the individual soul, which is bound.

2.1.14] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 178

the cause.

AMAACTATTATNMS SFA: || LY Il

aeqaaq Its non-difference wreaa-wefey; from words like ‘origin’ ete.

14. Its (of the effect) non-difference (from the cause results) from words like ‘origin’ etc.

In the last Sutra the objection against Brahman being the material cause, that it contradicts percep- tion, was answered from the standpoint of Parinéma- vada or the theory of Brahman actually undergoing modification. Now the same objection is refuted from the standpoint of Vivartavada or apparent modification, which is the standpoint of Advaita. The objection is: Texts like ‘There is no manifold- ress whatever here (in Brahman)’’ (Kath. 2. 4. 11) contradict perception. Reason also says that among things which get transformed into each other there cannot be difference and non-difference at the same time. Hence the doubt. In a single moon we can- not see two moons. What was spoken of in the last Sutra, viz. that the difference between them is one of name and form, even that is unreal, for in a thing which is one without a second, which is non-duality, even the difference due to name and form is impossi- ble. The example of the sea is not apt, for here both the sea and its modifications, waves and foam, are

objects of the senses, but Brahman is not. It is realized only through the scriptures and in Samadhi. What then is the truth? It is oneness, non-duality. As the effect is non-different from the cause, the latter alone is real. The Sruti also establishes this by the example of clay etc. in the Chhandogya Upanishad. “Just as, by the knowledge of one lump of earth, my dear, everything made of earth is known, the modification being only a name arising from speech, but the truth being that all is earth,... thus, my dear, is that instruction’? (Chh. 6. 1. 4-6). Here the Sruti by using the word ‘modification’ tries to prove that there is no separate reality of the pots ete., which are mere modifications of the lump of earth. They are not separate things but merely different conditions, just as the boyhood, youth, etc. of Deva- datta are mere conditions, and not real. So by knowing the lump of earth the real nature of the pots etc. is known. It matters little that the various forms are not known, for they are not worth know- ing, being unreal. Even though these pots etc. are objects of the senses, yet discrimination tells us that besides earth nothing real is found in these. They are merely names arising out of speech and nothing more. They are cognized through ignorance, hence they are unreal. The clay, on the other hand, is realized even apart from name and form and is there- fore real. Similarly Brahman alone is real and this world is unreal. The world being non-different from its cause, Brahman, the truth is oneness, non-duality,

2.1.16] BRAHMA-SUTRAS © 175

Brahman, the one vithout a second. To people who through want of experience have sot this insight into things, there will always be difference and non-differ- ence, even as in the case of the sea and its waves, but in reality these differences are relative and not true.

WIT BAAS: |] Le ty

wa On the existence ¥ and su@ai: is experienced.

15. And (because) on the existence (of the cause) is (the effect) experienced.

The effect is not experienced in the absence of the cause, which shows that the effect is not different from the cause. The world phenomena appear only because Brahman exists and not without It. Hence the world is non-different from Brahman.

ACT ATATET | VE I

wala On account of (its) existing 4 and ww; of the posterior.

16. And on account of the posterior (i.e. the effect, which comes into being after the cause) existing (as the cause before creation).

The Sruti says that before creation the world had its being in the cause, Brahman, as one with It: “Verily in the beginning this was Self, one only” (Ait. Ar. 2. 4, 1. 1); ‘‘In the beginning, my dear, this was only existence’? (Chh,. 6. 2. 1). Now since before

creation it was non-different from the cause, it continues to be so even after creation.

aAGIMsMeata Aq, 4, IAAL ATSTAATT || LO Il

waq-agem” On account of its being described as non-existent 4 not %fa 44 if it be said 4 no Walata by another characteristic Wax from the latter part of the text. —

17. If it be said that on account of (the effect) being described as non-existent (before creation) (the conclusion of the previous Sutra is) not (true); (we say) not so, (it being described) by another charac- teristic (as is seen) from the latter part of the text.

Non-existent indeed this was in the beginning’’

(Chh. 3. 19. 1). -‘The word ‘‘non-existent’’ does not mean absolute non-existence, but that the world did not exist in a differentiated condition. It was un- differentiated—had not yet developed name and form—in which sense the word ‘“‘non-existence’’ is also used in common parlance. It was in a fine condition, and after creation it became gross, develop- ing name and form. This sense is shown by the immediately succeeding portion of the text, ‘It be- came existent, it grew.’’ Hence the conclusion of the last Sutra is all right.

2.1.19] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 177

WR: MAKATI | Ve I qa: From reasoning wera from another Sruti text 4 and.

18. From reasoning and _ another Sruti text (this relation between cause and effect is established).

From reasoning also we find that the effect is non-different from the cause and exists before its origination. Otherwise everything could have been produced from anything. Farticular causes produc- ing particular effects only shows this relationship between cause and effect. Before creation the effect exists in the cause as unmanifest. Otherwise some- thing new being created, anything could have been created from all things. The fact is, it gets mani- fested on creation, that is all. That which is absolutely non-existent like the horns of a hare can never come into existence. So the cause cannot pro- duce altogether a new thing which was not existing in it already. Moreover, that the effect exists even before creation we find from such Sruti texts as °In the beginning, my dear, this was only existence, one without a second’? (Chh. 6. 2. 1).

Gaz i Ee ll qeaq Like cloth 4 and. 19. And like a piece of cloth.

Even as is cloth folded and spread out, so is the

world before and after creation. In the folded state one cannot make out whether it is a cloth or anything else, which is clearly discernible when it is spread out. In the state of Pralaya (dissolution), i.e. before creation, the world exists in a fine potential state in Brahman and after creation takes the gross form.

TAIT J ATT || Xo Il

zat As 4 and wrufe in the case of Pranas.

20. And as in the case of the different Pranas.

When the five different Pranas (vital forces) are controlled by Pranayama, they merge and exist as the chief Prana (which regulates respiration) merely maintaining life. From this we find that the effects, the various Pranas are not different from their cause, the chief Prana. So also with all effects; they are not different from their cause. Therefore it is estab- lished that the effect, the world, is identical with its cause, Brahman. Hence by knowing It everything is known.

were the cause of the world, then It and the Jiva

being really one, Brahinan would be responsible for creating evil.

gaceageaifearncorfectarafe: || 22 tt

vav-aqemt| On account of the other being stated “(as non different from Brahman) fea-wavafe-ets-nafa:

2.1.22] BRAUIMA-SUTRAS 179

defects of not doirg what is beneficial and the like wouid arise.

21. On account of the other (the in- dividual soul) being stated (as non-differ- ent from Brahman) there would arise (in Brahman) the defects of not doing what is beneficial and the hike.

In the previous topic the oneness of the world with its cause, Brahman, has been established. But the Sutra also states the identity of the individual soul and Brahman, and if Brahman at the same time were the cause of the world, It would be open to the charge of not doing what ig good for Itself. Being omniscient, It would not have ordained anything which would do the individual soul harm, or abstained from doing that which would be beneficial to it; for nobody is seen to do so with respect to oneself. Rather It would have created a world where everything would have been pleasant for the individ- ual soul, without the least trace of misery. Since that is not a fact, Brahman is not the cause of the world, as Vedanta holds.

sift a, Aafrsea | 22 Ul

wfaa Something more g but &¢-faeaq on account of the statement of difference.

22. But on account of the statement (in the Srutis) of difference (between the individual soul and Brahman) (Brahman

the Creator is) something more (than the individual soul).

‘But’ refutes the objection of the last Sutra.

The Creator of the world is omniscient and omnipotent. As such He knows the unreality of the Jivahood and the world, and also His own non- attachment to them, being a mere witness. He has neither good nor evil. So his creating a world of good and evil is not objectionable. For the individ- ual soul, however, there is good and evil so long as it is in ignorance. The Srutis clearly point out the difference between the individual soul and the Creator in texts like ““The Atman is to be realized”’ etc. (Brih. 2. 4. 5). AM these differences, however, are based on imaginary distinctions due to ignorance. It is only when Knowledge dawns that the individual soul, realizes its identity with Brahman. Then all plurality vanishes, and there is neither the individual soul nor the Creator. Thus the individual soul not being the creator of the world, the objection raised does not hold good.

aAVaTgsaAs ATFATA: | 22 I

wiifeaq Like stones ete. 4 and aequuia: its untenability.

23. And because the case is similar to that of stones (produced from the same earth) etc., the objection is untenable.

An objection may be raised that Brahman,

2.1.24] BPAHMA-SUTRAS 181

which is Knowledge, Bliss, and unchangeable, cannot be the cause of a world of diversity, of good and evil. This Sutra refutes that. The objection is untenakle, for we see that from the same material, earth, stones of different values like the precious jewels as also nseless stones are produced. So also from Brahman, which is Bliss, a world of good and evil can be created.

and instruments is yet the catise of the world.

sqeeranarata Ba, a, eftcafe y 22 ti

suaeit-eung Because collection of accessories is seen 4 not sfa 4q if it be said 4 no Mvaq like milk fe since.

24. If it be said (that Brahman with- out extraneous aids) cannot (be the cause of the world) because (an agent) is seen to collect materials (for any construction), (we say) no, since (it is) like milk (turning into curds).

A fresh objection is raised against Brahman being the cause of the world. There is nothing extraneous to Brahman to help in the work of crea- tion, for there is nothing besides Brahman. Brahman is one without « second and so free from all differen- tiations internal or external. It is ordinarily seen that one who creates something, the potter, for

example, uses extraneous aids like the wheel, clay, etc. But Brahman, being one without a second, has not these accessories and so is not the Creator. The Sutra refutes this objection by showing that such a thing is possible even as milk turns into curds with- out the help of any extraneous thing. If it be urged that even in this case heat or some such thing starts curdling, we say it only accelerates the process, but the curdling takes place through the inherent capa- city of the milk. One cannot turn water into curds by the application of heat! But Brahman being infinite, no such aid is necessary for It to produce this world. That It is of infinite power is testified by such Srutis as the following: ‘There is no effect and no instrument known of Him, no one is seen like unto Him or better. His high power is revealed as manifold and inherent, acting as force and knowledge.’’ (Svet. 6. 8).

aarfeaaft StF i 3

eafeaq Like gods and others “f¥ even @& in the world.

25. (The case of Brahman creating the world is) even like the gods and other beings in the world.

It may be objected that the example of milk turning into curds is not in point, since it is an inanimate substance. One never sees a conscious

2.1.26] BRAMUMA-SUTRAS 183

being, a potter, tu. instance, turning out things withcut the help of external aids.

This Sutra refutes thut objection by giving an example of creation by a conscious agent without any extraneous help. Even as geds, in the sacred books, are seen to ereate without extraneous means simply through their inherent power, so also the Lord through His infinite power of Maya is able to create this world of diversity. The examples cited above show tnat it is nat necessary that creation be limited by the conditions observed in the creation of pots. They are not universal.

the material cause of the world.

HATA ATAATCARCTATT AT | él

ara-wefa: Possibility of the entire (Brahman being modified) fataraame-aig: violation of the scriptural statement that Brahman is_ without parts @ or.

26. (Brahman’s being the cause of the world involves) either the possibility of the entire (Brahman being modified) or the violation of the scriptural statement that Brahman is without parts.

If Brahman is without parts and yet the material

cause of the world, then we have to admit that the entire Brahman becomes changed into this multiform

world. So there will be no Brahman left, but only the effect, the world. Moreover, it would contradict the scriptural text that Brahman is immutable. If on the other hand it is said that the whole of It does not undergo modification, but only a part, then we shall have to accept that Brahman is made up of parts, which is denied by scriptural texts. In either case it leads to a dilemma, and so Brahman cannot be the cause of the world.

AAT, UITFTSCMNA tl 2S I

aa: On account of scriptural texts 4 but weAaay on account of being based on the scripture.

27. But (it cannot be like that) on account of scriptural texts (supporting both the apparently contradictory views) and on account of (Brahman) being based on the scripture only.

‘But’ refutes the view of the former Sutra.

The entire Brahman does not undergo change, though the scriptures say that the world originates from Brahman. Witness such texts as, “One foot (quarter) of Him is all beings, and three feet are what is immortal in heaven’? (Chh. 3. 12. 6). And as in matters supersensuous the Srutis alone are authority, we have to accept that both these opposite views are true, though it does not stand to reason. The thing is, the change in Brahman is only apparent and not real. Hence both the views expressed by

2.1.29] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 185

the Sruti are true. It is on this basis that the apparently contradictory texts become reconciled and not otherwise.

areata aa fafersrar fe 1 2

wafa In the individual soul 4 and ve thus fafaar: diverse 4 also Te because.

28. And because in the individual soul also (as in the case of magicians etc.) diverse (creation exists). Similarly (with Brahman).

This Sutra establishes the view of the former by citing an example.

In the dream state there appears in the individ- ual self, which is one and indivisible, diversity resembling the waking state (See Brih. 4. 3. 10), and yet the indivisible character of the self is not marred by it. We see also magicians, for instance, produc- ing a multiple creation without any change in them- selves. Similarly this diverse creation springs from Brahman through Its inscrutable power of Maya, though Brahman Itself remains unchanged.

WQATATS |] VE tl

eqa-zimq On account of the opponent’s view being subject to these very objections @ and. 29. And on account of the opponent’s own view being subject to these very objec- tions.

If the Pradhana is taken to be the First Cause, as the opponents of the Vedantic view (the Sankhyas) hold, in that case also, as the Pradhana too is with- out parts, the Sankhyan view will be equally subject to the objections raised against Brahman as the First Cause. The Vedanta viewpoint has, however, answered all these objections, while the Sankhyas and Vaiseshikas cannot answer them, the changes being real according to them.

established.

AAI A ATMA | Bo I

aaitat Endowed with all 4 and aq-eaaTq because it is seen.

30. And (Brahman is) endowed with all (powers), because it is seen (from the scriptures).

Generally we see that men endowed with a physical body possess such powers. But since Brahman has no body, it is not likely that It can possess such powers—so says the opponent.

This Sutra gives proof of Brahman’s being endowed with Maya Sakti, the power of Nescience. Various scriptural texts declare that Brahman possesses all powers. ‘‘The great Lord is the Mayin (the ruler of Maya)’? (Svet. 4. 10). See also

2.1.82] BRAUMA-SUTRAS 187 fancncateate Bq, ATT tl 3% tl

faexuear Because devoid of organs 4 not <fa 8 if it be said a4 that Saq has been explained.

31. If it be said that because (Brahman) is devoid of organs (it is) not (able to create, tnough endowed with powers), (we say) this has (already) been explained.

As Brahman is devoid of organs. It cannot. create. Moreover, It is descriked as ‘‘Not this, not this’’, which precludes all attributes; so how can It possess any powers? This Sutra replies that it has already been explained in 2. 1. 4. and 2. 1. 25 that with respect to Brahman the scripture alone is authority and not reason. The scripture declares that Brahman, although devoid of organs, possesses all capacities. ‘‘Grasping without hands, moving swiftly without feet’? etc. (Svet. 3. 19). Though Brahman is without attributes, yet on account of Maya or Nescience It can be taken to possess all powers.

behind except a sportive impulse,

A MATHAACATA Il BR Ul

a4 Not watsaaaia on account of having motive.

82. (Brahman is) not (the creator of the world) on account of (every activity) having a motive.

Granting that Brahman possesses all powers for creation, a further objection is raised against Its being the cause. Nobody engages himself in any- thing without a motive or purpose. Everything is undertaken by people to satisfy.some desire. But Brahman is self-sufficient, therefore It has nothing to gain by the creation; hence we cannot expect It to engage Itself in such a useless creation. Therefore Brahman cannot be the cause of the world.

MBI, MARIA | 23

@taaq As is seen in the world § but MATRA mere pastime.

33. But (Brahman’s creative activ- ity) is mere pastime, as is seen in the world.

Even as kings without any motive behind are seen to engage in acts for mere pastime, or even as men breathe without a purpose, for it is their very nature, or even as children play out of mere fun, so also Brahman without any purpose engages Itself in creating this world of diversity. This answers the objection raised in the previous Sutra against Brahman’s being the cause of the world.

2.1.34] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 189

Tonic 14: Pavrtiality and cruelty cannot be attributed to Brahman.

aarudy vt 4, ARCATA, at fe axrafa'n ae t

agaaw@ Partiality and cruelty 4 not stewarq on account of Its taking into consideration (other reasons) a! so fe because esata declares.

34. Partiality and cruelty cannot (be attributed to Brahman) on account of Its taking into consideration (other reasons in that matter), because (the scripture) declares (it to be) so.

Some are created poor, some rich; hence the Lord is partial to some. Te is cruel, inasmuch as He makes people suffer. To such an objection this Sutra replies that the Lord cannot be accused of partiality and cruelty, because He dispenses accord- ing to the merit and demerit of the individual soul. The scripture declares to that effect, ‘‘A man becomes good by good work, bad by bad work” (Brih. 3. 2. 18). But this does not contradict the ihdependence of the Lord, even as the king’s status is not compromised by his giving presents to his.servants according to their action. Just as rain helps different seeds to sprout, each according to its nature, so God is the general efficient cause in bringing the latent tenden- cies of each‘ individual td fruition. Hence he is neither partial nor cruel.

a aatfaantfata aq, a, aarfacarg 34 tl

a Not aalfawaaq for want of distinction in work sfa aq if it be said 4 no waifeearq because of (the world) being without a beginning.

35. Tf it be said (that is) not (possi- ble) for want of any distinction in work (before creation), (we say) no, because of (the world) being without a beginning.

Since before the first creation the individual soul cannot possibly have had a previous existence, whence comes the difference in the condition of beings in that first creation, unless the Lord has caused it out of His partiality? This objection is answered by the Sutra, which says that creation is without a b»ginning and the question of first creation cannot arise. It is like a seed and its sprout. So the individua: souls have always had a_ previous existence and done good or bad deeds in accordance with which their lot in a subsequent creation is ordained by the Lord.

sada aIcqaaeaa & Re

sqyqaaq Is reasonable 4 and wh and sqawa is seen 7 also.

36. And (that the world is without a beginning) is reasonable and is also seen (from the scriptures).

2.1.87} BRAHMA-SUTRAS 191

Reuson tells us hat creation must be without a beginning. For if the world did not exist in a potential state in the form of Samskaras (impres- sious), then an absolutely non-existing thing would ve produced at creation. In that case even liberated suuls might be reborn. Morcuver people would be enjoying or suffcring without having done anything to deserve it—uan instance of an effect without a cause, which is absurd. It cunnot be attributed to primeval ignorance, which, being one, requires the diversity of individual past work to produce varied results. The scriptures aiso posit the existence of the world in former cycles in texts like ‘‘The Lord devised the sun und moon as before’? (Rig-Veda

So partiality and cruelty cannot be imputed to the Lord.

Tepic 13: Brahman endowed with all attributes necessary for creation.

ATINAGaayT || 39

aa-qa-saquq: From the possibility of all attri- butes 4 and.

37. And because all attributes (re- quired for the creation of the world) are possible (only in Brahman, It is the cause of the world).

192 BRAHMA-SUTRA&, [2.1.87

This Sutra answers the objection that because Brahman is attributeless It cannot be the material cause of the world.

Objection: Material cause is that which under- goes modification as the effect. Such a cause is generally seen to possess attributes in the world. Therefore an attributeless Brahman cannot be the material cause of the world, as it goes counter to our everyday experience.

Answer: Though the material cause undergoes change to produce the effect, yet this can take place in two ways. An actual modification, as when milk turns into curds, or an apparent modification due to ignorance, as when a rope is taken for a snake. Therefore though in the attributeless Brahman an actual change is impossible, yet an apparent modi- fication is possible owing to Its power of Maya. Because of this power all the attributes required in the cause for such a creation are possible only in Brahman. Therefore Brahman is the material cause of this world, not through actual modification, but through apparent modification, and It is also the efficient cause of the world. Therefore the fact that Brahman is the cause of the world is established.


CHAPTER II
----------

SECTION il

In the last section ali arguments against Brahman being the First Cause have been answered. In this section all the doctrines of the other schools are taken up for refutation thruugh reasoning alone without reference to the authority of the Vedas.

In the last Sutra it has been shown that Brahman possesses all the attributes, though through Maya, for equipping It to be the First Cause of the universe. Now the question is taken up whether the Sankhyan Pradhana can satisfy all those conditions.

Pradhdana as the First Cause.

TAA SITS ATAATAT ll % Il

Taaqiqagd: Because of the impossibility of design 4 and 4 not wqaraq that which is inferred.

1. And that which is inferred (viz. the Pradhana of the Sankhyas can) not (be the First Cause) because (in that case it is) not possible (to account for the) design (found in the creation).

In the preceding portion the Sankhyan doctrine

has been refuted here and there on_ scriptural

authority. Sutras 1-10 refute it through reasoning independent of the Vedanta texts.

The inert Pradhana does not possess the intelli- gence that is required for creating such a diverse and well-designed world as this, and so it cannot be the First Cause.

TTA | 2 I

yaa: Of a tendency ¥ and.

2. And on account of (the impos- sibility of such) a tendency (to create).

Even granting that such a creation is possible for the Pradhana, still there are other objections.

Inert Pradhana cannot again be credited with the desire or tendency to create. Clay by itself is never seen to createra pot without the agency of an intelligent being. So the inert Pradhana cannot be the cause, for in that case the activity necessary for the production of the world would be impossible. There must be some ruling intelligence for that purpose.

qasraareag, Taf tt 3 it

“waiseqay Like milk and water @q if it be said 7a there Wf even.

8. If it be said (that the Pradhana spontaneously undergoes modification) like (the flowing of) milk and water, (we

2.2.4) BRAHMA-SUTRAS 195

say that) even there (it is due to intelli- gence)..

The Sénkhyas try to get over the difficulty by saying that even as water flows in rivers spontane- ously or milk from the udder to the calf, so also t inert Pradhaéna may become active of its own accgfd and undergo modification into intellect, Ahankara, etc. without the agency of any intelligence. The lattes part of the Sutra refutes this and says that even the flowing of water and milk is directed by the Supreme Lord. The scriptures also say: ‘‘Under the mighty rule of this Immutable, O GAargi, some rivers flow to the east’? etc. (Brih. 8. 8.9); “He who inhabits water, but is within it,... who con- trols water from within’? (Brih. 3. 7. 4). The Lord is behind everything directing the material world.

cufatanrafeatearateacare, usu

afataraafed: There being no extraneous agency besides it Yand wateeaiq because it is not dependent.

4. And because (the Pradhana) is not dependent (on anything), there being no extraneous agency Aesides it, (its activity and non-activity cannot be explained).

The Pradhana of the Saénkhyas being inert, it cannot of itself start to be active, or when once set in motion, cease do be active of itself. So in the absence of an intelligent guiding principle it is impossible for the Sankhyas to explain creation and

dissolution at the beginning and end of a cycle, which they admit. The only other principle besides the Pradhana that they admit is the Purusha or soul, but according to them it is not an agent, for it is indifferent. All other principles which they admit including even Karma are but products of the Pradhana and as such cannot have any determining effect on it. Hence their position Jaunches them into a contradiction.

ATAVATATSA TA TTTPTT Wt & I

wea Elsewhere ‘ala because of its absence 4 and 4 not @ufzaq even as grass etc.

5. And (it can) not (be said that the Pradhana undergoes modification spon- taneously) even as grass etc. (turn into milk); because of its absence elsewhere (than in the female mammals).

Nor is the spontaneous modification of the Pradhana possible. If you cite grass as an instance, we say it is not changed into milk spontaneously but only when eaten by female mammals. Other- wise it would be converted into milk independently of them. Since the analogy itself does not stand, we cannot accept the Pradhaéna’s undergoing modi- fication of itself.

TeATTASCTUTATATA Ih &

wgumH Accepting WY even wanna because of the absence of any purpose.

2.2.7] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 197

6. Even accepting (the Sankhyan position with regard to the spontaneous modification cf the Pradhana, it cannot be the tirst Cause) because of the absence cf any purpose. |

Grauting the spontaneity of the Pradhana, it will lead to a contradiction in their philosophy. If the Pradhana is active spontaneously, then this activity cannot have any purpose, which would contradict the Sankhyan view that the modification of the Pradhana is for tlie experience and Liberation of the soul. Moreover, the soul being perfect, it is already free and nothing can be added to or taken away from it. Hence the Pradhana cannot be the First Cause.

gearaafata Bq, aerfy 9 i

gaa-wiw-aq Even as a person or a magnet sfa @q if it be said aafa even then.

7. Ifit be said (that the Purusha can direct the Pradhana) even as a (crippled) person (can direct a blind man), or a magnet (the iron filings), even then (the difficulty cannot be surmounted).

The Sankhyas hold that though the Purusha is itself inactive yet it can direct the Pradhana; the Sutra refutes it. According to the SAankhyas;“the Pradhana is independent, and so it is not in keep- ing with this to say that it depends on the nearness

of the Purusha for its activity, even as the iron filings depend on the magnet for their motion. Moreover, the Purusha being always near the Pradhéna, there would be permanency of creation. Again, the case of the lame and the blind is not an apt example, for the lame man can give directions to the blind one and direct him; but since the Purusha is altogeher indifferent according to the Sankhyas, it ‘cannot do that with respect to the Pradhana. In Vedanta, though Brahman is indifferent, yet through Maya It is endowed with attributes and activity; so It becomes the Creator. Again the Purusha and the Pradhana are altogether separate and independent; the one is intelligent and indifferent, the other inert and independent. Now if these two are to be con- nected, a third principle will be required, and since no such principle is recognized in the Sankhya philos- ophy, their connection is impossible.

ASCATATTAAT It < It

wfxa-wqyaa9T: Owing to the impossibility of the relation of principal (and subordinate) 4 and.

8. And because the relation of princi- pal (and subordinate) is impossible (among the Gunas, the Pradhana cannot be active).

The Pradhana, according to the Sankhyas, con- sists of the three Gunas (constituents), Sattva, Rajas,

and Tamas, which are independent of each other and in a state of equilibrium before creation. Creation

2.2.9] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 199

begins -when ‘this equ‘librium is upset and one Guna becolaes morc ae sie than the other two. Equilibrium cannot be npset without any external force, ror can the Gunas, which are absolutely independent in the ie of Pradhdna, take of themselves a subsidiary /position to another Guna without losing their independence. Hence creation would be impossible.

seagate at eaten reatarrag t € tt

waqr Otherwise Wafat if it be inferred 4 even sufa-fadimna owing to the absence of the power of intelligence.

9, Even if it be inferred otherwise, owing to the absence of the power of intelligence (the other objections to the Pradhana being the First Cause remain).

If it be inferred from the effects that the cause, the Pradhana, consists of Gunas which are not abso- lutely independent, but contain some characteristics inherent in them, like unstability, owing to which they themselves enter into a state of inequality even while they are in a state of equilibrium, then also because of the want of intelligence the objections founded on design in the world and that.it would lead to continuous creation, stand against accepting the Pradhand as the First Cause. Vide Sutras

fanfatarcaraagar il 2° I

fanfatur Because of contradictions ¥ also warney inconsistent.

10. Also because of contradictions (the Sankhyan theory) is inconsistent.

There are various contradictions in the Sankhya philosophy, as, for example, sometimes the senses are said to be eleven and again they are said to be seven, again the Tanmatras are said to be produced from Mahat in one place and in another place from Ahankara (Ego), and so on. Its differences with Sruti and Smriti are well known. Hence the doctrine of the Pradhana of the Sankhyas cannot be accepted.

Vaiseshika standpoint against Brahman beings the First Cause.

nectaaer seaqfavsarany ti ke Il

ABA Sead Even as the great and long @ or #€- yfeqewarary from the short and the infinitesimal.

ll. (The world may originate from Brahman) even as the great and long (triad etc.) originate from the short (and the minute dyad) or (this kind of dyad) from the infinitesimal (atom).

The Sankhyas having been refuted, the Vaise- shika philosophy is taken up in Sutras 11—17 and

2.2.11] BRaHMA-SUTRAS 201

refuted, First, the pieusible objection against Brahman beiny the First Cause is answered from the standpoint of the Vaiseshikas in Sutra 11. According to thein the qualities of the cause produce similar qualities in the effects, even as the whiteness of the threads produce that of the cloth woven out of them. So if the world is created from Brahman, the quality of intelligence should abide in the world also; but as a matter of fact it does not. So Brahman cannot be the cause of the world. This argument is refuted on the ground that the same objection applies to the Vaiseshika view of creation also; hence it is no special objection against Vedanta. According to them the ultimate condition of the world is atomic, and all things in this world are but aggregates of the different kinds of atoms. The atoms are eternal and the ultimate cause of the world. In the state of dissolution the world exists in the atomic state. At the time of creation the atoms of air are set in motion by Adrishta, the unseen principle, and two atoms combine to form a dyad. Again, three dyads combine to form a triad and four dyads form a tetrad, and in this way gross air is created. Similarly, the other elements are created from their respective atoms and dyads. An atom, according to this philos- ophy, is infinitesimal, a dyad is minute and short, and compounds from the triad upwards are great and long. Now, if two atoms which are spherical, produce a dyad which is minute and short, Astit in which the sphericity of the atom is not-reproduced,

202: BRAHMA-SUTRAS [2.2.11

or if four dyads, which are short and minute, produce a tetrad, which is great and long, but the minute- ness and shortness of the dyad are not handed down, it. is clear that all the qualities of the cause are not reproduced in the effect. So there can be no objec- tion to an intelligent Brahman being the cause of the world, which is not intelligent. Brahman, which is Knowledge and Bliss, can produce a world which is inert ‘and full of misery.

Yropic 3: Refutation of the atomic theory of the Vaiseshikas. Having answered the objection against the Vedantic view, the author of the Sutras now pro- ceeds to refute the Vaiseshika philosophy.

/SraaThy 7 HATACATATA: V2 A

suauifq In either case 4 is not #4 activity Wa: therefore 44-WaTa: negation of that.

12. In either case (viz. the Adrishta, the unseen principle, inhering either in the atoms or in the soul) the activity (of the atoms) is not (possible); therefore the negation of that (viz. of creation through the combination of atoms).

If the world is created by the combination of atoms, the question is, what causes this combination? If it is a seen cause, it is not possible before the creation of the body. A seen cause can either be an endeavour; -or an impact, or the like. Unless there

9.2.18] BRAHMA-SUTRAS | 208

is the connection of the soul with the mind, there can be no endeavour o1: the part of the soul, according to the Vaiseshika assumption. And since before creation there is no body and therefore no mind, endeavour cannot take place. Similarly with imnact etc. If the cause is Adrishta (the unseen principle), does it inhere in the soul or in the atoms? In either case, it cannot be the cause of the first motion of the atoms; fcr this Adrishta is non-intelugent and so cannot act by itself. If it is inherent in the soul, the soul being then inert, there is no intelligence tc guide this Adrishta. If it 1s inherent in the atoms, it being always present, a state of dissolution would be impossible, for the atoms will be always active. Again, the soul is without parts like the atoms, and so there if no possibility of any connec- tion between the soul and the atoms. Consequently, if the A“trishta inheres in the soul, it cannot influence the motion cf the atoms not connected with the. sewdl. So in all cases original activity in the 4toms is not possible, and in the absence of th:¢t there can be no combination of atoms, as the Vj diseshikas say. Gonse- quently, the theory that the orld is created by the combination of atoms is unte’ able.

AAMINGARATSA plaraatea: aan

waara-qegaaana Sam aya being admitted 4 also wat equality of ain waafed: regressus in infinitum would result.

18. (The Vaisest#ka theory is unten- able) also (because jr Involves) & Tegressus

in infinitum on similar reasoning, since it accepts Samavaya.

Samavaya or inseparable inherence is one of the seven categories of the Vaiseshikas. They say it is this that connects the dyad with its constituents, the two atoms, since the dyad and the atoms are of differ- ent qualities. In that case Samavaya (inherence) itself also being different from these dyads and atoms, which it connects, another Samavaya will be required to connect it with these, and that in its turn will require another Samavaya to connect it with the first Samavaya and so on without an end. Hence the argument would be defective, and consequently the atomic doctrine, which admits Samavaya for combina- tion, is inadmissible.

V faeraa @ Arar il 22 1

“aes ua Permanently 4 and wary because exist- ing. hay

§l4. And bewause of the permanent existence (of the tendency to act or other- wise of the atoms, the atomic theory is inadmissible). |

The atomic theory invokyes another difficulty. If the atoms are by nature actijve, then creation would be permanent, for dissolutign would mean a change in the nature of the atoms, which is impossible. If on the other hand, they are by nature inactive, then dissolution would be perminent, and there will be

2.2.15] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 205

no creation for the same reason. Their nature can- not be both activity and inactivity, they being contra- dictory. If they are neither, their activity and in- activity would depend on an efficient cause, like Adrishta, which being always connected with the atoms, they will always be active, and creation would be permanent. If on the other hand, there is no efficient cause, there will be no activity of the atoms and hence ne creation. Consequently the atomic theory:s again inadmissible.

_earfareara faqaet, zit i £1

amfeatiq On account of possessing colour etc. 4 and faqay: the opposite eq Lecause it is seen.

15. And on account of (the atoms) possessing colour etc., the opposite (of what tne Vaiseshikas hold would be true), because it 1s seen.

The atoms are said to have colour etc., for other- wise the effects will not possess these qualities, since it is the qualities of the cause that are found in the effects. In that case the atoms would cease to be atomic and permanent. For whatever possesses colour etc. is found to be gross, not minute, and im- permanent as compared with its cause. So the atoms also, which have colour etc., must be gross and impermanent, and this contradicts the Vaiseshika tenet that they are minute and permanent. So the atoms cannot be the ultimate cause of the world.

SIIAT S ataag i VE

gual In either case 4 and @q because of defects.

16. And because of defects in either case (the atomic theory is untenable).

The four gross elements earth, water, fire, and air are produced from atoms. Now these elements are different as regards qualities. Earth, for example, has the qualities of touch, taste, smell, and colour, while water has only three of these, fire only two, and air one. If we suppose that their respective atoms also possess the same number of qualities as they, then while an atom of air has one quality, an atom of earth will have four qualities. Possessing four qualities it will be bigger in size, for our experience says that an increase of qualities cannot take place without an increase of size, and consequently it would cease to be atomic. If, on the other hand, we take them all to possess the same number of qualities, then there cannot be any difference in the qualities of the pred- ucts, the elements, according to the principle that the qualities of the cause are reproduced in its effects. In either case, the Vaiseshika doctrine is defective and therefore inadmissible.

AQTATSTAAATIAT Il VO Il

wafcaeiq Because it is not accepted 4 and war completely S47=M to be rejected.

2.2.18] | BRAUMA-SUTRAS 207

17. And because (the atomic theory) is rot accepted (by any authoritative persons like Manu and cthers) it is to be completely rejected.

aaqara STMT HST aaa: Le A

aqzia The aggregate Swa-¢q% having Sor its cause the two 8fy even aq-amifx: it will not take place.

18. Even if the (two kinds of) aggre- gates proceed from their two causes, there would result the non-formation (of the two aggregates).

This Sutra begins the refutation of the Bauddha school. There are three principal schools of Buddhism, viz. the Realists, who accept the reality of both the outside and the inside world, consisting respectively of external things and thought; the Idealists, who maintain that thought alone is real; and the Nihilists, who maintain that everything is void and unreal. But all of.them agree that every- thing is momentary—nothing lasts beyond a moment.

The Realists among the Bauddhas recognize two aggregates, the external material world and the internal mental world—both together making up the universe. Thr external world is made up of the aggregation of atoms. These atoms are of four kinds

—atoms of earth, which are hard; atoms of water, which are viscid; atoms of fire, which are hot; and atoms of air, which are mobile. Of the internal world, the five Skandhas (groups) are the cause. They are—Rupa Skandha, compris- ing the senses and their objects; the Vijnana Skandha, comprising the series of self-cognitions which give rise to the notion of ‘I’; the Vedana ‘Skandha, comprising pleasure, pain, etc.; the Samjna Skandha, comprising the cognition of things by names, as, he is a man; and the Samskara Skandha, comprising attachment and aversion, Dharma (merit), Adharma (demerit), etc. By the aggre- gation of these Skandhas the internal aggregate or the mental world is produced. These are the two internal and external aggregates referred to in the Sutras. Sutras 18-27 refute the Realists’ view. The question now arises, how are these aggre- gates formed? Is there an intelligent principle behind as the cause, the guide, of the aggregation, or does it take place spontaneously? If there is an intelligent principle, is it stationary or momentary? If it is stationary, the Buddhistie doctrine of moment- ariness is contradicted. If it is momentary, then we cannot say that it comes into existence first and then unites the atoms, for that would mean that the cause lasts for more than one moment. Again, if there is no intelligent principle as guide, how can the non-intelligent atoms and the Skandhas aggregate in a systematic way? Moreover, the activity would

2.2.19] BRAHMA-SOTRBAS 200

be eternal, and thcre would be no destruction or Pralaya. For ali these reasons the formation of aggregates cannot be accounted for, and in their absence there cannot exist the stream of mundane existence. Consequently, the doctrine of this school of Bauddhas is untenable.

gatacicqacarfafa Ad, a, scafaarafafa- MACITT UW LS tl

satat-aagaiq Because of successive causality vfa Sq if it be said 4 no safa-ma-fafaaena because they are merely the efficient cause of the origin.

19. If it be said (that the formation of aggregates is possible) because of the successive causality (of Nescience etc. in the Bauddha series), (we say), no, because they are merely the efficient cause of the origin (of the immediately subsequent thing in the series, and not of the aggregation).

The series is as follows:- Nescience, Samskara (attachment, aversion, etc.), Vijnana (self-conscious- ness), name (earth, water, etc.), colour (the rudi- mentary ingredients of the body), abode of the six (i.e. the. body and the senses), contact, experience of pleasure etc., desire, movement, merit and demerit, etc. In this series the immediately preceding item is

the cause of the next, and so we can explain the

mundane existence without any combining principle, as demanded in the previous Sutra. These consti- tute an uninterrupted chain of cause and effect, revolving unceasingly, and this cannot take place without aggregates. So aggregates are a reality.

The Sutra refutes it by saying that though in the series the preceding one is the cause of the subse- quent one, there is nothing which can be the cause of the whole aggregate. That the atoms cannot com- bine of themselves even when they are assumed to be permanent and eternal, has been shown in refut- ing the Vaiseshikas. Much more is their combina- tion by themselves impossible when they are moment- ary, as the Buddhists hold. Again, the individual soul, for whose enjoyment etc. this aggregate of body etc. exists, is also momentary and cannot therefore be an enjoyer; and whose again is Libera- tion, since the individual soul is momentary? So the series, though it stands in a relation of successive causality, cannot be the cause of the aggregates, and there being no permanent enjoyer, there is neither any need of these aggregates. So the Bauddha doc- trine of momentariness is untenable.

The Sutra can also be explained as follows: The Bauddhas say, if we hold that the atoms stand in a relation of causality, then no combining principle of the atoms would be necessary; in that case they would join of themselves. The latter part of the Sutra refutes this saying that the causality will explain only the production of the atoms of the

2,2.20] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 211

pot of a subsequent moment by the atoms of the pot of a previous moment, but will not explain the com- bination of the atoms into an aggregate, which can take place only if there is an intelligent agent behind, for otherwise the combination of inert and moment- ary atoms cannot be explained.

Sates @ Tafachars | Xo A

sucee At the time of the production of the subsequent thing 4 and ya-fatiatq because the ante- cedent one has ceased to exist.

20. And because at the time of the production of the subsequent thing (even in the series of successive causality) the antecedent thing has already ceased to exist, (it cannot be the cause of the subsequent thing).

The Sutra now refutes that even the successive causality spoken of the series Nescience, SamskAras, etc. is untenable. Since everything is momentary, the antecedent thing would already have ceased to exist at the next moment, when the subsequent thing 1s created; so it cannot be the cause of the other. The clay;that exists at the time the pot is created, is alone the cause of the pot, and not that which existed before and has ceased to exist then. If it be still maintained to be the cause, then we have to accept, that existence comes out of non-existence, which is impossible. Again the acceptance of the

212 _ BRAHMA-SUTRAS [2.2.20

doctrine of momentariness would go against the principle that the effect is the cause in a new form. This principle shows that the cause exists in the effect, which means that it is not momentary. Again on account of the momentariness of things ‘origina- tion’ and ‘destruction’ will be synonymous, for if we say there is difference between the two, then we shall be forced to say that the thing lasts at least for ‘more than one moment, and consequently we shall have to abandon the doctrine of momentariness.

sata ofastachat abrqaneaar ti 22 Il

wafa If non-existence (of cause) be assumed ufes-satty: contradiction of the proposition Waa otherwise ata simultaneity.

21. If non-existence (of cause) be assumed, (the effects being produced in spite of it) (there will result) contradiction of their (Bauddhas’) proposition. Other- wise (there would result) Se (of cause and effect).

If, to avoid the difficulty shown in the previous Sutra, the Bauddhas say that effects are’ produced without a cause, then they would contracict their own proposition that every effect has a cause. If on the other hand a cause be assumed, then we have to accept that the cause and effect exist simultane- ously at the next moment, i.e. the cause lasts for more.than one moment, as already shown in the last

2.2.22] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 218

Sutra, which would faisify the doctrine of momentari- ness.

nfadeanfedearfrctarafe:, afeesera W2h

vfaden (fatra)-enfadenfate-wafa: Conscious de- struction and unconscious destruction would be impossible wre eq owing to non-interruption.

22. Conscious and unconscious de- struction would be impossible owing to non-interruption.

The Bauddhas maintain that universal destruc- tion is ever going on, and that this destruction is of two kinds, conscious and unconscious. The former depends upon an act of thought, as when a jar is broken by a man with a stick, while the latter is the natural decay of things. The Sutra says that either kind of destruction would be impossible, for it must refer either to the series of momentary existences or to the single members of that series. The series is continuous and can never be stopped. Why? Because the last momentary existence before such destruction must be assumed either to produce its effect or not to produce it. If it does then the series would continue and will not be destroyed. If it does not produce the effect, the last momentary existence ceases to be a fact at all, for according to the Bauddhas existence (Satta) means causal efficiency. Again the non-existence of the last momentary exist- ence would lead backward to the non-existence of the

previous momentary existence and so on of the whole series.

Again these two kinds of destruction cannot be found in the individual members of the series also. For owing to the momentary existence of each mem- ber no conscious destruction of it is possible. Neither can it be unconscious destruction, since the individ- ual member is not altogether destroyed; for when a pot is destroyed we find the existence of the clay in the sherds. Even in those cases where it seems to vanish, as when a drop of water disappears on account of heat, we can infer that it continues to exist in some other form, viz. as steam.

SAM BF SPITgT | V3

sua In either case 4 and @aq because of objec- tions.

23. And in either case (1.e. whether Nescience with its offshoots meets with conscious or unconscious’ destruction resulting in final release) because of the objections (that arise, the Bauddha posi- tion is untenable).

Nescience, according to the Bauddhas, is the false idea of permanency in things momentary. They say that on the destruction of it Moksha or Freedom is attained. Now this destruction of Nescience must be one of the two kinds referred to in the last Sutra. If it is a conscious destruction, depending on the

2.2.24] BRAHMA-SUTRAS _ 8s

effort of the individual—his penance and knowledge, then this would go rouater to the Buddhistic doctrine of momentariness, according to which Nescience will also be momentary and cease to exist after a moment of its own accord. And if we say that the destruc- tion of ignorance is spontaneous, then the Buddhist instruction as to the ‘path’ is useless. So in either case the Bauddha position is untenable.

ATTA APTANA | VW I

wratst In the case of Akasa (space) 4 also wfastnq there being no difference.

24. The case of Akasa also not being different (from the twofold destruction, it also cannot be a non-entity).

According to the Bauddhas, besides the twofold destruction Akasa or space is a third non-entity. It means the absence in general of any covering or occupying body. It has been shown in Sutras 22-28 that the two kinds of destruction are not absolutely devoid of positive characteristics and so cannot be non-entities. The case of Ak4sa is also similar. Just as earth, air, etc. are recognized to be entities in consequence of their being the substratum of prop- erties like smell ete., similarly Akasa also on account of its being the substratum of sound ought to be recognized as an ‘entity. Earth etc. are experienced through their attributes, and the existence of Akasa

also is experienced through its attribute, sound. Consequently it also must be an entity.

AFATATS I RU

wyga: On account of memory 4 and

25. And on account of memory (the permanency of the experiencer has to be recognized).

A further refutation of the momentariness of things is given here. If everything is momentary, the experiencer or enjoyer of something must also be momentary. But that the enjoyer is not momentary and abides longer is realized from the fact that people have the memory of past experiences. Memory is possible only in a person who has pre- viously experienced it, for what is experienced by one man is not remembered by another. So the agent of the experience and the remembrance being the same, he is connected with at least two moments—which refutes the doctrine of momentari- ness.

WWAA:, ATCA i RE tl

+ Not waa; from non-existence weealq because this is not seen.

26. (Existence does) not (result)

from non-existence, because this is not seen.

2.2.27] _ _BRAHMA-SUTRAS 217

The Bauddhas say that from anything that is eternal and non-changing no effects can be produced; for that which does not change cannot give rise to effects. So they say that the cause undergoes destruc- tion before the effect is produced. The seed under- goes destruction, and then the sprout comes out. In other words, existence springs from non-existence. The Sutra refutes this by saying that if it were so, then the assumption of special causes would be meaningiess. Anything might spring from anything; for non-entity is the same in all cases. There is no difference between the non-entity of a mango stone and that of an apple seed. Consequently we could expect an apple tree to come out of a mango stone. If there are distinctions between non-existences, with the result that the non-existence of a mango stone differs froza that of an apple seed, and therefore they produce certain definite results, then they will no longer be non-entities, but something positive.

saretararafa aad fate: 1 29 11

saint Of the effortless wh even 4 and way thus fafg: attainment of the goal.

27. And thus (if existence should spring from non-existence, there would result) the attainment of the goal even by the effortless.

Mere inactivity would result in the fulfilment of all ends, for there would no longer be the necessity

of the cause, activity. Even final Freedom ‘would result without any effort.

ATATT:, SASH: | Ve I

a Is not Waa: non-existence FW: on account of their being experienced.

. 28. Non-existence (of things extern- al) is not (true), on account of their being experienced.

From this Sutra begins the refutation of the Idealists among the Bauddhas, according to whom only ideas exist and nothing else.

According to them the external world is non- existent. Does it mean that the objective world is absolutely non-existent like the horns of a hare, or does it mean that it is unreal even as the world seen in a dream is unreal. The Sutra refutes the former view. In that case we could not have experienced it. The external world is an object of experience through the senses, and cannot therefore be altogether non-existent like the horns of a hare. The Buddhist may say that he does not affirm that he is conscious of no object, but only that what is seen in his consciousness alone shines as something external. But then the very nature of consciousness itself proves the existence of external things different from consciousness, for men are conscious of things or objects of perception, and nobody is conscious

2.2.29] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 219

of his perception mereiy. The very fact that the Bauddhas say that the internal cognition appears ‘as someihing external’ shows that the external world is real. If it were not real, the comparison ‘like something external’ would be meaningless. No one says that Devadatta is like the son of a barren woman.

qatar a ranrizad ti 28

§watq Owing to the difference of nature 4 and a is not ayifeaq like dreams etc.

29. And owing to the difference of nature (in consciousness between the wak- ing and the dream state, the experience of the waking state) is not like dreams etc.

This Sutra refutes the alternative view given in the previous Sutra. The Bauddhas may say that perception of the external world is to be considered similar to dreams and the like. In a dream there are no external objects; yet the ideas appear in a twofold form as subject and object. The appearance of an external world is similarly independent of any objective reality. This Sutra refutes that view. There is a difference between the dream state and the wak- ing state. What is seen in a dream is contradicted by waking experience, it is unreal. The dream state is a kind of memory, but the waking state is a real perception; so it cannot be rejected as untrue. More- over, what is the proof of the existence of conscious-

ness except experience? If that is so, why should not an object which is experienced be taken also as existing? It may be said that even the Vedantins acknowledge the unreality of the external world, since it is contradicted by the knowledge of Brahman, and that this view is based on the Srutis. But if the Bauddhas accept the authority of the Vedas, then they would be included within the Vedantic school and no longer remain outside it, but as a matter of fact they do not accept the Vedas.

HT UTE:, AFTSEA: I Ro I

a Is not wa: existence wqqaer: because (external things) are not experienced.

30. The existence (of Samskaras) is not (possible according to the Bauddhas), because (external things) are not experi- enced.

The Bauddhas say that though external things do not exist, yet the actual variety of notions like pot, cloth, etc. can be accounted for by the preceding Sams- karas or mental impressions left by previous experi- ence, even as the impressions of the waking state give rise to the variety of experience in the dream state. This view is not tenable, says the Sutra, for mental impressions are impossible without the percep- tion of external objects, and this the Bauddhas deny. The assumption of a beginningless series of mental

2.2.82] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 221

impressiuns as cause rnd effect would only lead to a regressus in infinitum and not solve the difficulty.

safiracarsat ita

afuaaiq On account of the momentariness 4 and.,

31. And on account of the moment- ariness (of the ego-consciousness it can- not be the abode of the Samskaras).

The mental impressions must have an abode. Without that they cannot exist. But the doctrine of momentariness denies permanency to everything. Even the Alayavijnana or ego-consciousness, is momentary and cannot be that abode. Unless there is a permanent principle connecting the past, present, and future, there cannot be remembrance or recogni- tion of an experience originating at a particular time and place. If the Alayavijnana is said to be some- thing permanent, then that would go counter to the doctrine of momentariness.

AIAMAITALT | 32 I aaq! In every way 84qIt: being illogical 4 and. 32. And (as the Bauddha system is) illogical in every way (it cannot be accepted). This Sutra can also be interpreted as refuting the

Nihilists: The translation would then be: And (as Nihilism) is illogical etc.

7) BRAHMA-SUTRAS [2.2.82

Nihilism of the Bauddhas goes counter to every- thing. It goes against the Sruti, the Smriti, percep- tion, inference, and every other means of right knowledge and so has to be entirely disregarded by those who are mindful of their welfare.

| wafer, AARTATT N33 I ™ Not uafaq in one waaay on account of the impossibility. 38. On account of the impossibility (of contrary attributes) in one and the same thing (the Jaina doctrine is) not (true).

After the refutation of the Bauddhas the Jaina doctrine is taken up for discussion and refutation. The Jainas acknowledge seven categories, which can be mainly divided into two groups, the soul and the non-soul. Again they predicate seven different views as regards the reality of everything. Everything according to them may be real, unreal, both real and unreal, different from real and unreal, indescribable, and so on. Now this view about things cannot be accepted, as it is absurd to think of the same thing as endowed with these contradictory attributes of reality, unreality, etc. According to the Jaina doc- trine we cannot arrive at any certain knowledge, and this world, heaven, and even Freedom will become

2.2.85] | BRAHMA-SUTRAS 228

doubtful. Meson: to Vedantic view, however, the

world is Anirvachaniya, unspeakable, ‘and so fit for all relative purposes.

Uae ANCATHETT I Be I

way In the same way 4 and Wial-waneeary non- universality of the soul,

34. And in the same way (there would arise) the non-universality of the soul.

The Jainas say that the soul is of the size of the body. If so, it would be limited and with parts; therefore it cannot be eternal. Another difficulty would be that the soul of an ant taking an elephant body as a result of its past work will not be able to fill up that body; and conversely, the soul of an elephant w:ll not have sufficient space in an ant body. The same difficulty arises with respect to the different stages like childhood, youth, old age, etc. in a single individual.

a a qatataafacha:, frarerfeea: i 3% tl

aa Nor vata in turn wf even “fate: consistency faarcfea: on account of change etc.

35. Nor (can) consistency (be gained) even (if the soul is assumed to take on and discard parts). in turn (to suit different bodies), on account of the change etc. (of the soul in that case).

To get over the difficulty shown in the previous Sutra about the soul being of the size of the body it assumes, if it be regarded as having parts and alternately adding to and taking away from them, then another defect, viz. the soul undergoing modi- fication and consequently being non-eternal, would arise. If it is non-eternal and ever-changing, bond- age and Liberation cannot be predicated of it.

secarafeaaraafacacararaare: I] 3é tl

wey-wafea: Because of the permanency (of the size) at the end 4 and 3aa-fagatqy there follows the permanency of the two “faa8: there is no difference.

36. And because of the permanency (of the size of the soul) at the end (2.e. on release) there follows the permanency of the two (preceding sizes, viz. those at the beginning and middle), (hence) there is no difference (as to the size of the soul at any time). |

The size of the soul at the time of release, the Jainas hold, is permanent. Now if this size is permanent, it cannot have been created, for nothing created is eternal and permanent. [If it is not created, it must have existed in the beginning and middle as well. In other words the size of the soul was always the same, be it minute or great. Hence the Jaina theory that it varies according to the size of the, body is untenable.

2.2.87] _ BRAHMA-SUTRAS 225

only the efficient,’ 10. material, cause of the world.

TeY:, TATHALATT tt 29 Il qa: The Lord’s Wasa on accourt of inconsist- ency. ‘

37. Tne Lord’s (being merely the efficient cause of the world cannot hold good) on account of the inconsistency (of that doctrine).

The Vedanta says that the Lord is both the efficient and the material cause of the world. The Naiyayikas, Vaiseshikas, Yogins, and Maheswaras say that the Lord is the efficient cause only, and the materia] cause is either the atoms according to the Naiyayikas and Vaiseshikas, or the Pradhana accord- ing to the Yogins and others. He is the ruler of the Pradhana and the souls, which are different from Him. Such a view ieads to inconsistency. How? Because it makes the Lord partial to some and pre- judiced against others, for some people are well off in this world, while others are miserable. The opponents here may say: How does the Vedantin get out of the difficulty? He replies: The Lord is impartial, but He directs the individuals according to their merit and demerit earned in previous exist- ences. (See Sutras 2. 1. 84-35). For the scriptures say so, and if you accept scriptural authority in this, you will have to accept its statement, ‘I will be

many”’ etc. (Taitt. 2. 6), which shows that the Lord is both the efficient and the material cause.

| BAAN TTTAaT Il 3¢ tl aua-wygqa: Because relation is not possible 4

and..

88. And because relation (between the Lord and the Pradhana or the souls) is not possible.

As the Lord is devoid of parts, and so also the Pradhana and the souls, there can be no conjunc- tion between the Lord and them, and consequently they cannot be ruled by Him. Neither can the relation be one of inherence, which subsists between entities inseparably connected as whole and part, substance and attributes, etc. This difficulty does not arise in the case of the Vedantins, firstly because the relation is inexpressible identity (Tadatmya) and secondly because they depend on the Srutis for their authority and so are not expected to base their reasoning entirely on observed facts, as the opponents

have to. SPIGA TTTTAT lt AE Il

vfaera-wqqat: Rulership being impossible 4 and.

39. And on account of the rulership (of the Lord) being impossible.

These schools infer the existence of the Lord, and say that He directs the Pradhana etc. as the

2.2.41] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 227

potter does his clay. But the Pradhana etc. are not objects uf perception like the clay. Hence the Lord cannot direct them, for the inference must be strictly in accordance with observed facts.

RUTTSa, 4, Ataf tt vo tl

acyaq As the senses 4a if it be said 4 no dhnfew: because of enjoyment etc.

40. If it be said (that the Lord rules the Pradhana etc.) even as (the Jiva rules) the senses (which are also not perceived), (we say) no, because of the enjoyment etc.

Even as the individual soul directs the sense- organs which are not perceived, so also we can take that the Lord rules the Pradhana etc.—says the opponent. The analogy is not proper, for in the former case the Jiva is seen to enjoy pleasure, suffer pain, etc., from which we infer that it rules the organs. If the analogy be true, the Lord also would suffer pain and pleasure caused by the Pradhana etc.

AAICANAATAT AT Ul Bz It

waaay Subject to destruction Weryat non-omnis- clence 4! or.

41. (There would result from their doctrine the Lord’s) being subject to des- truction or (His) non-omniscience.

According to these schools the Lord is omnigy, cient and eternal, i.e. not subject to destruction,

The Lord, the Pradhana, and the souls according to the Maheshwaras are infinite and separate. Now the question is, does the omniscient Lord know the measure of the Pradhéna, soul, and Himself or not? In either case the doctrine of the Lord’s being the mere efficient cause of the universe is untenable. If the Lord knows their measure, they are all limited, and therefore a time will come when they will all ‘cease to exist. Again, if he does not know them, then He would cease to be omniscient.

Panchardtra school.

SCOTCAATATA tl 2 Il

safa-waaat Owing to the impossibility of orig- ination.

42. The origination (of the individual soul from the Lord) being impossible (the Pancharatra doctrine is untenable).

The Pancharatra or the Bhagavata school is now taken up for examination. It recognizes the material and efficient causality of the Lord, but propounds certain other views which are objectionable. Accord- ing to it Vasudeva is the Supreme Lord, the material and efficient cause of the world. By worshipping Him, meditating on Him, and knowing Him one attains Liberation. From Vasudeva is born Sankar- shana, the Jiva; from Jiva Pradyumna, the mind;

2.2.44] _ BRAHMA-SUTRAS 229

from mind Aniruddha, the Ego. These are the fourfold form (Vyubs) of the Lord Vasudeva.

Of these, the view that Vasudeva is the Supreme Lord, to be worshipped and so on, the Vedantin accepts, as it is not against the Sruti. But the creation of the Jiva etc. he rejects, as such creation is impossible. Why? Because if the soul be created, it would be subject to destruction, and so ro Liberation can be predicated of it. That the soul is not created will be shown in Sutrg 2. 8. 17.

at Ha: RTO tl BB il

44 Nor wa: from the agent #uq the instrument.

43. Nor (is it seen that) the instru- ment (is produced) from the agent.

As an instrument, like an axe, is not seen to be produced from the agent, the wood-cutter, the Bhagavata doctrine—that from the individual soul is produced the internal instrument or mind, and from the mind the ego—cannot be accepted. Neither is there any scriptural authority for it. The scripture plainly says that everything originates from Brahman.

faarafeara at aanfarra: tee

fasrarfe-we If intelligence etc. exist 4 or aq-aufadty: no warding off of that.

44. Or if the (four Vyuhas are said to) possess intelligence etc., yet there is

no warding off of that (viz. the objection raised in Sutra 42).

The Bhagavatas may say that all the forms are Vasudeva, the Lord, and that all of them equally possess knowledge and lordship, strength, valour, etc., and are free from faults and imperfections. In this case there will be more than one Iswara, which is redundant and also goes against their own “assumption. Even granting all this, the origination of the one from the other is unthinkable. Being equal in all respects, none of them can be the cause of another, for the effect must have some feature that is lacking in the cause. Again the forms of Vasudeva cannot be limited to four only, as the whole world from Brahma down to a clump of grass is a form of the Supreme Being.

fanfatars ti 8& tl

fanfaturq Because of contradictions 4 and.

45. And because of contradictions (the Bhagavata view is untenable).

Moreover the theory involves many contradic- tions. Sometimes it speaks of the four forms as qualities of the Atman and sometimes as the Atman itself,


CHAPTER II
----------

[Section III]

In the previous section the inconsistency of the doctrines of the various non-Vedantic schools has been shown and consequently their unreliability has been esiablished. A doubt may arise that on account of contradiction among the Sruti texts, the doctrine that upholds Brahman as the First Cause may also be of the same class. To clear such a doubt by harmonizing the apparent contradictions in scriptural texts, the next two sections are begun. The argu- ments of the opponent, who tries to prove the self-contradiction of the Sruti texts, are always given first, and then follows the refutation.

at fara, sera: tf At

4 Not faaq Akasa Waa: (as it is) not so stated by the Sruti.

1. Akasa (is) not (created), (as it is) not so stated by the Sruti.

To start with, the texts dealing with creation are taken up, ane Ak&sa (ether) is first dealt with. In the Chhandogya Upanishad, where the order of creation is given, the text says, “‘It thought, ‘May I

be many, may I grow forth.’ It sent forth fire’’ (6. 2. 8). Here there is no mention of Akasa being produced by the Sat or Brahman. Hence Akasa has no origin, it is eternal.

afte Tut

we There is q but.

2. But there is (a Sruti text which states that Akasa is created).

The opponent in this Sutra anticipates a possible objection against his arguments advanced in Sutra 1, and explains it away in Sutra 3. The text referred to here is, ‘From that Self (Brahman) sprang Akasa (ether)’’ etc. (Taitt. 2. 1).

auf, aaRIATa tl 3 Ul

ata Used in a secondary sense Wearaly on account of the impossibility.

38. (The Sruti text dealing with the origin of Akasa) is to be taken in a second- ary sense, on account of the impossibility (of Akasa being created).

The Taittiriya text referred to in the previous Sutra, the opponent holds, should be taken in a secondary sense, as Akasa cannot be created. It has no parts and hence cannot be created. Moreover, Akasa is all-pervading, and therefore it can be infer- red that it is eternal—without origin.

2.8.5] BRAWMA-SUTRAS 288

RAI ll S il qetq From the Sruti texts 4 also.

4. Also from the Sruti texts (we find that Akasa is eternal).

In the last Sutra Ak&sa was inferred to be eternal. Here the opponent cites a Sruti text io show that it is eternal. The text referred to is, “‘(And the formless are) Véyu and Akaésa—these are immortal’? (Brih. 2. 38. 8). Being immortal or eternal, it cannot have a beginning.

CATSAHY AANA | & Il wiqIs possible 4 and waa of the same (word ‘sprang’) aw@azaq like the word ‘Brahman’,

5. It is possible that the same word (‘sprang’ be used in a primary) and (secondary sense) like the word ‘Brah- man’,

The opponent in the Sutra answers a weak point in his argument, viz. how can the same word ‘sprang’ in the Taittiriya text, ‘“‘From that Self (Brahman) sprang Akasa; from Akasa sprang Vayu (air), from air sprang fire’’ etc. (2. 1), be used in a secondary sense with respect to Akasa and in the primary sense with respect to air, fire, etc? He does this by referring ‘to other Sruti texts, where the word ‘Brahman’ is so used. ‘Try to know Brahman by penance, for penance is Brahman,’’ where Brahman

is used both in a primary and in a _ secondary sense in the same text; also ‘Food is Brahman’’ (Taitt. 8. 2) and ‘Bliss is Brahman’’ (Taitt. 8. 6), where Brahman is used in a secondary and primary sense respectively in two complementary texts.

oferarsearfacaafatareasedee: tl & I

vfasn-weifa; Non-abandonment of proposition weafatarqy from non-distinction 82%: from the Srutis.

6. The non-abandonment of the prop- osition (viz. by the knowledge of one everything else becomes known, can result only) from the non-distinction (of the entire world from Brahman). From the Sruti texts (which declare the non-differ- ence of the cause and its effects, this prop- osition is established).

This Sutra refutes the opponent’s view set forth so far, and gives the conclusion. The proposition that from the knowledge of one (Brahman) every- thing else is known, can be true only if everything in the world is an effect of Brahman. For the Sruti says that the effects are not different from their cause, and consequently the cause being known, the: effects will also be known. If Akasa is not created from Brahman, then the proposition in question falls through; for after knowing Brahman Akésa still remains to be known, on account of its not being an effect of Brahman. But if it is created, then no

2.8.7] | BRAEMA-SUTRAS © 285

such difficulty arises. Hence Akasa is created; other- wise the authoritativeness of the Vedas would be gone. The Chhandogya text in which Akasa is not mentioned is accordingly to be interpreted in the light of the Taittiriya text; that is, Akasa and Vayu have to ke inserted, and the text would mean that after creating Akasa and Vayu, “‘It created fire.”’

aratganrt g fart steat i 9 1

araq-fantay Extending to all effects whatsoever q but faa: separateness #laa7q as in the world.

7. But in all effects whatsoever (there is) separateness, as (is seen) in the world.

The word ‘but’ refutes the idea that Akdsa is not created. We see in the world that all created things are different from each other. A pot is differ- ent from a piece of cloth and so on. In other words, everything which has a separateness about it is created. We cannot conceive of a thing as separate from others and yet eternal. Now Akasa is distinct from earth etc., and hence it cannot be eternal, but. must be a created thing. It may be objected that the Atman also is divided from ether and so on and therefore It too is an effect. But that is not possible, for all things are created from the Atman, which is their Self, and so not separate from them; therefore It is not an effect. The all-pervasiveness and eternity of Ak4&sa are only relatively true; it is created and is an effect of Brahman.

Uda Atafoar sqreqra: | < tl

waa By this afer air arena: is explained.

8. By this (2.e. the foregoing explana- tion about Akasa) (the fact of) air (also being an effect) is explained.

AAMTET A:, TTTTA: tl € I waara; There can be no origin § but 4: of the Sat {That which is) Ward: us it does not stand to reason.

9. But there can be no origin of the Sat (That which is 1.e. Brahman), as it does not stand to reason.

The question arises whether Brahman also is an effect like Akasa etc. In the Svetasvatara Upanishad there occurs the text: ‘‘You art born with Your face turned to all directions’? (Svet. 4. 8), which clearly states that Brahman is born. This view is refuted by the Sutra, which says that Brahman, which is existence itself, cannot be an effect, as It can have no cause. ‘‘And He has neither parent nor Lord’’ (Svet. 6. 9). Neither can non-existence be such a cause, for the Sruti says, ‘How can existence come out of non-existence?’’ (Chh. 6. 2. 2). Nor is it proper to say that existence is its own cause, for the

2.8.10] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 287

effect must have some speciality not possessed by the cause. Brahman is niere existence without any dis- tinction. We observe that only particulars § are produced from the general, as different pots are from clav, and not vice versa. Tnerefore Brahman, which is existence in general, cannot be the effect of any particular thing. The fact that every cause is itself an effect of some antecedent thing is repudiated by the Sruti: ‘That great, birthless Self is undecaying’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 25), for it leads to a regressus in infinitum. So Brahman is not an effect, but is eternal.

ARSa:, AAT BNE i Lo aa; Fire wa; from this aa so f¥ W% says.

10. Fire (is produced) from this (te. air), so says (the Sruti).

‘From air (is produced) fire’? (Taitt. 2. 1.) shows that fire springs from air. Again we have,

That (Brahman) created fire’? (Chh. 6. 2. 8). These

two texts can be reconciled by interpreting the Taittiriya text to mean the order of sequence: Brahman, after creating air, created fire. This Sutra refutes such an ingenious explanation and says that fire is produced from Vayu or air. This does not contradict the Chhandogya text, for it means that as air is a product of Brahman, it is from Brahman, which has assumed the form of air, that fire is

produced. The general proposition that everything is created from Brahman requires that all things should ultimately be traced to that cause, and not that they should be the immediate effects. Hence there is no contradiction.

ATT LS Ul

11. Water (is produced from fire).

‘From fire is produced water’? (Taitt. 2. 1); “That created water’? (Chh. 6. 2. 8). These two texts leave no doubt that water is created from fire. Here also we must understand that from Brahman, conditioned as fire, water is produced.

fara, sferenreqageeraees: tl 22 tl

vfaat Earth wfranrceq-wernty: because of the subject-matter, colour, and other Sruti texts.

12. Earth (is meant by the word ‘Anna’) because of the subject-matter, colour, and other Sruti texts.

‘From water earth”? (Taitt. 2. 1); “‘It (water) produced Anna (lit. food)’’ (Chh. 6. 2. 4). The two texts are apparently contradictory; for in one water is said to produce earth and in another food. The Sutra says that ‘Anna’ in the Chhandogya text means

2.8.18] - BRAHMA-SUTRAS 289

not food, but earth. Why? First on account of the subject-matter treated in the section. In “‘It created fire,’’? and such other texts the Sruti describes the creation of the five elements, and so ‘Anna’ should refer to an element and not food. Again in a com- plementary passage we have, ‘‘The black colour in fire is the colour of Anna”’’ (Chh. 6. 4. 1), where the reference to colour clearly indicates that the earth is meant by ‘Anna’. Hence ‘Anna’ in the passage under discussion means earth, and there is no con- tradiction between the Chhandogya and Taittiriya texts. Other Sruti texts like, ‘“That which was there as the froth on water was solidified and became this earth”? (Brih. 1. 2. 2), clearly show that from water earth is produced.

residing in the preceding element is the cause of the subsequent element in the order of creation.

aahavarnga gf afegra 83

aqufranar Because of His reflecting va only 4 but afawiq from His indicatory marks @: He.

13. But because of His reflecting only (are the subsequent elements created from the previous element in the order of crea- tion; so) He: (the Supreme Lord is the creator of air etc.). (We know this) from His indicatory marks.

Brahman is described in the Srutis as the creator of everything. Again we find in them texts like “From Akasa is produced air’? (Taitt. 2. 1), which declare that certain elements produce certain effects independently. So the opponent holds that there is a contradiction in the Sruti texts. This Sutra refutes that objection saying that the Lord residing within these elements produces after reflection certain effects. Why? On account of the indicatory marks. ‘‘He who inhabits the earth... and who controls the earth from within’’ etc. (Brih. 3. 7. 8) shows that the Supreme Lord is the sole ruler, and denies all inde- pendence to the elements. Again, ‘‘That fire thought,... that water thought’’ (Chh. 6. 2. 3-4) shows that after reflection these elements produced the effects. This reflection is impossible for inert elements, and so we are to understand that the Lord residing within these elements thought and produced the effects. Therefore the elements become causes only through the agency of the Lord, who abides within them. Hence there is no contradiction between the two

texts cited at the beginning.

order to that of creation,

faqaaur gq mAtSa:, STTIA T Le I

faqaaa In the reverse order 4 indeed #4: order wa: from that (the order of creation) 4 and Bayada is

reasonable.

2.3.15] BRAIMA-SUTRAS 241

14, (At Pralaya the elements are) indeed (withdrawn into Brahman) in the reverse order from that (of creation); and this is reasonable.

The question is whether at the time of cosmic dissolution the elements get withdrawn into Brahman in the order of creation, or in the reverse order. The Sutra says that it is in the reverse order, for the effect goes back to tne causal state, as ice, for in- stance, melts into water. Hence each thing is with- drawn into its immediate cause and so on in the reverse order, tili Akasa is reached, which in turn gets merged in Brahman.

and organs does not interfere with the order of ercation and reabsorption, as they are the products af the elements.

sau faarmaarat aio afegrfafa 3a, a, APTS U4 I

aati In between faaaaaal intellect and mind ##4a in the order afaviq owing to indication of that fa 4q if it be said 4 not so SfaHaq on account of non- difference.:

15. If it be said that in between (Brahman and the elements) the intellect and the mind (are mentio&ied, and there-

fore that ought to be the order in creation

and the inverse order in reabsorption), owing to the indication (in the Sruti texts) to that effect (which upsets the order of creation of the elements), (we say) not so, on account of the non-difference (of the intellect and the mind from the elements).

_- In the Mundaka Upanishad occurs the following text, ‘‘From this Self are produced Pradna, mind, the senses, ether, air, fire, water, and earth, the support of all’? (2. 1. 8). An objection is raised that the order of creation is as described in this text, which contradicts the order of creation of elements described in the Chhandogya 6. 2. 3 and other Srutis. This objection is here refuted on the ground that the Mundaka text only states that all these are produced from the Self, but gives no order of creation like the other texts. Again the intellect, mind, and organs are effects of the elements, and so they can come into existence only after the elements are created. On account of this non-difference of the organs from the elements, their origination and reabsorption are the same as those of the elements. That the organs are modifications of the elements is proved by Sruti texts like, ‘For the mind, my child, consists of earth, the vital force of water, the vocal organ of fire’? (Chh. 6. 6. 5). Therefore the Mundaka text does not upsét the order of creation mentioned elsewhere.

2.3.16] BRAEMA-SUTRAS 248

of the body, and metaphorically of the soul.

ATALATAAET HATTA ATATAM AT:, agranafacarg Wy 2é tt

aararaqqiay; Depending ou (the bodies) of moving and stationary beings q but @m may be aRqey: mention of that wet: secondary axteaifzarq on. account of (those terms) depending on the existence of that.

16. But the mention of that (viz. birth and death of the individual soul) is apt only with reference to (the bodies) of moving and stationary beings. (With ref- erence to the soul, however,) it is second- ary, on account of (those terms) depend- ing on the existence of that (1.e. body).

A doubt may arise that the individual soul, too, has birth and death, because people use such expres- sions as ‘Devadatta is born’? or ‘Devadatta is dead’’, and because certain ceremonies are pres- cribed by the scriptures at the birth and death of people. This Sutra refutes such a doubt and says that the individual soul has neither birth nor death. These belong not to the soul, but to the body with which the soul is connected. This connection and disconnection with the body is popularly called the birth and death of the soul. Moreover, the Sruti

says, “‘It is the body, which bereft of the soul, dies; the soul does not die’? (Chh. 6. 1]. 3). So birth and death are spoken primarily of the bodies of mcving and stationary beings, and only metaphorically of the soul. That birth and death mean, respectively the connection and disconnection of the soul with the body is proved by such texts as “‘That man, when he is born, or attains a body,”’’ etc. (Brih. 4. 3. 8).

eternal, ctc.

ATCHT, AAAACATTIA ATT: | VO Il

4 Is not (produced) Wa the individual self waa: not being (so) mentioned by the scriptures fawara being eternal 4 also a: from them (Srutis).

17. The individual self is not (pro- duced), (for it is) not (so) mentioned by the scriptures; also (on account of its) being eternal, (for so it is known) from them (the Sruti texts).

At the beginning of creation there was only “One Brahman without a second’? (Ait. 1. 1), and so it is not reasonable to say that the individual soul is not born, for then there was nothing but Brahman. Again the Sruti says: ‘“‘Just as from a fire tiny sparks fly in all directions, even so from this Atman emanate all Pranas (organs), all worlds, all gods, and all the selves’? (Brih. 2. 1. 20, Madhyandina

2.3.18] BRAEMA-SUTRAS 245

recension). So the opponent argues that the individ- ual scul is born at the beginning of the cycle, just as Akisa and other elernents are born. This Sutra refutes 1t and says that the individual soul is not born, for there is 10 statement to that effect in the Sruti in the section dealing with creation. On the other hand Sruti texts clearly deny such birth to the individual soul. ‘‘Unborn, eternal’? (Kath. 1. 2. 18); “This yreat birthless Sell’? (Brih. 4. 4. 25). It is the one Brahman without a second that enters the intellect and appears as the individual soul (Jiva). ‘““Haviny created it, lt entered into it’? (Taitt. 2. 6). Hence as there is in reality no difference between the individual soul and Brahmar., the fact of the Jiva’s being non-created does not contradict the text, “At the beginning there was only the Atman without a s2cond”’ (Ait. 1. 1). The creation of souls spoken of in the other texts cited is only in a secondary sense. It does not therefore contradict the text, “Having created it, It entered into it.”’

mtelligence.

atSa Ta ll 2c

a: Intelligence wa va for this very reason.

18. For, this very reason (v2z. that it is not created), (the individual soul is) intelligence (itself).

The Vaiseshikas say that the individual soul is not intelligent by nature, for it is not found to be so in the state of deep sleep (Sushupti) or of swoon. It is only when the soul comes to the conscious plane and unites with the mind that it becomes intelligent. This Sutra refutes such a possibility, for it is the intelligent Brahman Itself that, being limited by the Opadhis (limiting adjuncts), the body etc., manifests as‘ the individual soul. Therefore intelligence is its very nature, and is never altogether destroyed, not even in the state of deep sleep or swoon. ‘That it does not see in that state is because although seeing then, it does not see; for the vision of the witness can never be lost, because it is immortal. But there is not that second thing separate from it which it can see’? (Brih. 4. 3. 23). Therefore it is not true that its intelligence is lost, for it is impossible. It does not in reality lose its power of seeing; it does not see only because there is no object to see. Were intelligence actually non-existent then, who would be there to say that it did not exist? How could it be known? Moreover, he who says that he did not know anything in deep sleep, must have been existent at that time. Otherwise how could he remember the condition of that state? Hence the intelligence of the Self is never lost under any condition.

SeMTieatearTaA aN tt Le tt

2.8.20] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 247

— Bafa-aes-wiaitna Passing out, going, and return- ing. |

19. (As the Sruti texts declare the soul’s) passing out, going (to other spheres) and returning (thence), (the suul is not infinite in size).

From this up to Sutra 82 the question of the size of the soul—-whethcr it is atomic, medium-sized or infinite—-is discussed. We have in the Svetas- vatara Upanishad: ‘‘He is the one God... all- pervading’? (6. 11); and again. “This Atman is atomic’’ (Mu. 3. 1. 9). The two texts contradict each other and we have to arrive at a decision on the point. Sutras 20-28 set forth the prima facie view. The opponent says, we find in the scriptures texts mentioning the soul’s passing out of the body, going to heaven etc., and returning from there. This is possible only if the soul is atomic, and not infinite or all-pervading; for to an infinite soul there can be no going and coming. Therefore the soul is atomic.

WTCHAT ALATA: tt Ro |

@amt (Being connected) directly with their agent 4 and guqi: the latter two.

20. And the latter two (the going and coming) (being connected) directly with their agent (the soul), (it is of atomic size).

Even if the soul is infinite, still it can be spoken of as passing out of the body, if by that term is meant

ceasing to be the ruler of the body. But the two latter activities, viz. the going and coming, aré not possible for an entity that is all-pervading. So’ the soul is atomic in size.

aay aitia Bq, a, carers Re

4 4: Not atomic 44-4‘ as the scriptures state it to be otherwise @fa 94 if it be said 4 not so ¥%au- fear owing to a principle other than the individual

soul being the subject-matter (in these texts).

21. Ifit be said (that the soul is) not atomic, as the scriptures state it to be otherwise (2.e. all-pervading), (we say) not so, for (the one) other than the individual soul (1.e. Supreme Brahman) is the subject- matter (in those texts).

Sruti texts like, ““He is the one God... all- pervading”? (Svet. 6.11), refer not to the individual soul, but to the Supreme Lord, who is other than the individual soul and forms the chief subject-matter of all the Vedanta texts; for that is the one thing that is to be known, and is therefore propounded by all the Vedanta texts.

WUNMAFATATEAT A I} 22 I

are-sarnray From direct statements (of the Sruti texts) and infinitesimal measure 4 and.

22. And on account of direct state- ments (of the Sruti texts as to the atomic

2.8.24] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 249

size) and infinitesimal measure (the soul is atomic).

‘“This Atman is atomic’? (Mu. 8. 1. 9). Again we have, “‘That individual soul is to be known as part of the hundredth part of the tip of a hair divided a hundred times’? (Svet. 5. 9), which shows that the soul is smaller than even the smallest. Hence the soul is atomic in size.

afachaarrsaag il 23

wfattz: No contradiction we7a7q like sandal-paste. 23. There is no contradiction, lke sandal-paste.

Even as sandal-paste apnlied to any particular part of the body gives an agreeable sensation all over the body, even so the soul, though of atomic size and therefore occupying only one part of the body, may experience happiness and misery extending over the entire body.

wafefadtentafa aa, a, aeqarargate fe n 22H wafefa-aseq On account of the particular posi- tion sf 4q if it be said 4 not so WAIAIA on account of the admission #fe in the heart f¥ indeed.

94, If it be said that on account of

the particular position (of the sandal-paste in the body the analogy is not just), (we

say) not so, on account of the admission (by the scriptures of a special seat for the soul, viz.) in the heart alone.

A possible objection is raised by the opponent against his own view. In the case of the sandal-paste we see that it occupies a particular part of the body and yet gladdens the whole body. But in the case of the soul we do not know that it occupies a partic- ular place, and in the absence of that we cannot infer that like the sandal-paste it must occupy a particular portion of the body and therefore be atomic. For even an all-pervading soul or a soul pervading the whole body like the skin can give rise to the same result. So in the absence of any proof it is difficult to settle the size of the soul. This objec- tion the opponent refutes by saying that such Sruti texts ds, ‘‘The self-effulgent one within the heart’’ (Brih. 4. 3. 7) declare that the soul has a particular abode in the body, viz. the heart, and hence it is atomic.

NIST SHIT tt RV quq Owing to (its) quality 4 or @twaq_ as in the world. 25. Or owing to (its) quality (viz. intelligence) as in the world. This Sutra gives another argument to show how

an atomic soul can have experience throughout the body.

2.8.27] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 251

In the world we find that a light placed in one corner of a room iJlumines the whole room. So also the soul, though atomic and therefore occupying a particular portion of the body, may, because of its quality of intelligence, which pervades the whole body, experience pieasure and pain throughout the body.

afatat wera i 24 Il

safata: The extension beyond (the object i.e. the soul) wraq like odour.

26. The extension (of the quality of intelligence) beyond (the soul, in which it inheres) is like odour (which extends beyond the fragrant object).

We find that the sweet odour of flowers extends beyond them to the surrounding region. Even so the intelligence of the soul, which is atomic, extends beyond the soul and pervades the whole body.

aar a areata tt 29 1

aa Thus @ also zwxafa (the Sruti) shows or declares.

27. Thus also (the Sruti) declares.

The Sruti also declares that it is by the quality of intelligence that the atomic soul pervades the whole body. For instance, it says: ‘“‘Just so has the intelligent self penetrated this body up to the very hairs and the finger nails’? (Kau. 4. 20).

TAIT Re yaa Separate Su¢mq on account of the teaching.

28. On account of the separate teach- ing (of the Sruti) (that the soul so pervades the body owing to its quality of intelli- gence).

A further argument is given to establish the pro- position of the last Sutra. The text, ‘“‘Having by Prajna (intelligence) taken possession of the body” (Kau. 3. 6), shows that intelligence is different from the soul, being related as instrument and agent, and that with this quality the soul pervades the whole body.

ALTMNATCIATS FT AGATAM:, ATATT i RE tl

azgqwacaiy On account of its having for its essence the qualities of that (viz. the Buddhi) 9 but asmqéwz: that declaration (as to its atomic size) wsaq even as the Intelligent Lord (is declared to be atomic).

29. But that declaration (as to the atomic size of the soul) is on account of its having for its essence the qualities of that (viz. the Buddhi), even as the Intelligent Lord (Brahman, which is all-pervading, is declared to be atomic).

The word ‘but’ refutes all that has been said in Sutras 19-28, and decides that the soul is all-pervad-

2.3.30] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 253

ing, because the all-pervading Brahman Itself is said to have entered the universe as the individual soul, which again is stated to be identical with It. How then is the soul declared to be atomic? Such declara- tions are on account of its preponderating in the qualities of the Buddhi (intellect) so long as it is Imagined to ve connected with the latter and in bondage. Passing out, going, aud coming are qualities of the Buddhi and are only imputed to the individual soul. For the same reason also, 2.e. limitation of the intellect, is the Atman regarded as atomic. Jt is like imagining the all-pervading Lord as limited for the sake of Updsana, devout meditation.

ATATCHAVACAA T FW: ACRATT Nt Ro Ui

araq-aiaatiaaiq So long as the soul (in its relative aspect) exists 4 and 4 ¢tu: there is no defect azxaiq because it is so scen (in the scriptures).

30. And there is no defect (in what has been said in the previous Sutra), (as the conjunction of the soul with the intellect exists) so long as the soul (in its relative aspect) exists: because it is so seen (in the scriptures).

An objection might be raised against what has been said in the previous Sutra that since the con- junction of the soul and the intellect, which are differ- ent entities, must necessarily come to an end some time, the soul, when so disjoined from the Buddhi,

will either cease to exist altogether or at least cease to be a Samsfrin (individualized). This Sutra replies: There can be no such defect in the argument of the previous Sutra, for this connection with the intellect lasts so long as the soul’s state of Samsira is not destroyed by the realization of supreme Knowl- edge. How is this known? It is known from the declaration of the scriptures that even at death this connection is not severed. ‘This infinite entity that is identified with the intellect.... Assuming the likeness of the intellect it moves between the two worlds, it thinks, as it were, it moves, as it were,’’ (Brih. 4. 8. 7). The terms ‘“‘thinks, as it were’’, ‘“‘moves, as it were’’ also mean that the self does not think and move on its own account, but only through its association with the intellect.

qeearfaaa caer catsfasafeatrra ty 38 tl

qeaifeaq Like virility etc. 9 W& its (i. e. of the connection with the intellect) a: existing wfaafsaiag on account of the manifestation being

possible.

31. On account of the manifestation (of the connection with the intellect in the awakened state) being possible only on its existing (potentially in Sushupti), like virility etc.

An objection is raised that in Sushupti or deep sleep there can be no connection with the intellect,

2.8.32] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 255

for it is said, ‘“‘Then he becomes united with the True, he is gone to his own”? (Chh. 6. 8. 1); how then can it be said that this connection lasts so long as the individualized state exists.

This Sutra refutes it and says that even in Sushupti this connection exists in a fine or potential form. But for this it could not have become manifest in the awakened state. V‘rile power becomes mani- fest in youth only if it exists in a potential condition in the child. So this connection with the intellect lasts so long as the individualized state exists.

frotassarqrafeanagt seaac- faaat ATS | 32 I

faciqafa-sqgafa-vay: There would result perpet- ual perception or non-perception wearfaA: limita- tion of the power of either of the two @ or else waa otherwise.

32. Otherwise (1.e. if the intellect or mind be not accepted) there would result either perpetual perception or perpetual non-perception, or else the limitation of the power of either of the two (viz. the soul or the senses).

What is the necessity of accepting an internal organ (Antahkarana), of which the intellect is only a mode? The Sutra says that if it be not accepted, the senses being always in contact with their objects,

there would always result perception of everything, for all the requisites, viz. the soul, the senses, and the objects, are present. If, however, this be denied, then it would mean that knowledge can never result, and nothing would ever be cognized. So the oppo- nent will have to accept the limitation of the power either of the soul or of the senses. Such a thing is not possible in the Atman, which is changeless. Nor ean it be said that the power of the senses, which is not impeded either in the previous moment or in the subsequent moment, is so limited in the middle. Hence we have to accept an internal organ (Antah- karana), through whose connection and disconnection perception and non-perception take place. The Sruti also refers to a common experience of ours, “‘I was absent-minded, I did not hear it’? (Brih. 1. 5. 38). Hence there exists an internal organ, of which the intellect is a mode, and it is the connection with this that causes the Atman to appear as the individualized soul, as explained in:Sutra 29.

HAT, MATATTATT | 33 Il

al Agent wengqaeiq in order that the scriptures may have a meaning.

33. (The soul is) an agent, on account

of scriptural (injunctions) having a mean- ing on that ground only.

2.8.36 | BRAHMA-SUTRAS 257

The question as regards the size of the soul has been seitled. Now another characteristic of the soul is taken up for discussion. The individual soul is an agent for only on that. basis do scriptural injunctions like, ‘He is to sacrifice’? ete. have a sense. In these the Sruti enjoins certain acts to be done by the agent and if the soul be not an agent these injunctions would becoine meaningie:s.

fasrcragexra i 38 Ul

fasiz-sy@mq On account of the Sruti teaching

wandering about.

34. And on account cf (the Sruti) teaching (its) wandering about.

‘It, taking the organs, moves about as it pleases in its own body’? (Brih. 2. 1. 18). This text which describes the wandering of the soul in the dream state clearly shows that it is an agent.

SATAIMT {1 34 ll 35. On account of its taking (the organs). The text quoted in the last Sutra also shows that the soul in dream state takes the organs with it, thereby declaring that it is an agent.

. a Ls saqanna fara, a afazafaqaa: 1 3é tt ayema On account of mention 4 also fRatarm in respect of action 4 4q if it were not so fadw-faqaa: the reference (would have been) of a different kind.

36. Also on account of the (the script- ures) mentioning (the soul as an agent) with respect to action. If it were not so, the reference (would have been) of a different kind.

‘Intelligence performs sacrifices, and it also performs all acts’? (Taitt. 2. 5). Here by ‘intellig- ence’ the soul is meant and not the Buddhi, thereby showing that the soul is an agent. If the intention of the Sruti were to refer to the Buddhi then it would have used the word not in the nominative case, but in the instrumental case, as ‘by intelligence,’ meaning, through its instrumentality, as it has done elsewhcre in similar circumstances. Vide Kau. 3. 6.

sqafeaaafaad: {| 39 1

suafaaq As in the case of perception ‘faq: (there is) no rule. |

37. As in the case of perception, (there is) no rule (here also).

An objection is raised that if the soul were a free agent, then it would have performed only what is beneficial to it, and not both good and bad deeds. This objection is being refuted. Just as the soul, although it is free, perceives both agreeable and dis- agreeable things, so also it does both good and bad deeds. There is no rule that it should do only what is good and avoid what is bad.

2.3.40] BRAMMA-SUTRAS 259

eifentaurTars tl Be I

88. On account of the reversal of power (of the Buddhi, which is inadmis- sible).

If the Buddhi. which is an instrument, becomes the agent and ceases to function as an instrument, we shall have to imagine some other thing as the instrument. Hence the dispute is only as regards terms, foi in either case an agent different from the instrument has to be admitted.

GAATEAATATS ll BE Il watte-watar On account of the impossibility of Samadhi 4 and.

39. And on account of the impossi- bility of Samadhi.

If the soul:s not an agent, then the realization prescribed by texts like, ‘‘The Atman is to be realized’? (Brih. 2. 4. 5), through Samadhi would be impossible. It will not be capable of activities like ‘Shearing, reasoning, and meditation’’ that lead to Samadhi, in which state perfect Knowledge dawns. Therefore there will be no Liberation for the soul. So it is established that the soul alone is the agent, and not the Buddhi.

connected with the Upddhis.

AAT A AMAA || Yo Il

“260 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [2.8.40 get Even as 4 and aw carpenter saaat is both.

40. And even as a carpenter is both.

In the last Sutra the topic about the soul’s being an agent is established. Now the question is raised whether this agency is its real nature or only a super- imposition. The Nyadya school holds that it is its very nature. This Sutra refutes it and says that it is superimposed on the soul and not real. For the Sruti declares, ‘‘This Atman is non-attached’’ (Brih. 4, 8.15). Just as a carpenter suffers when he is busy working with his tools and is happy when he leaves off work, so does the Atman suffer when, through its connection with the Buddhi etc., it is active, as in the waking and dream states, and is blissful when it ceases to be an agent, as in deep sleep. All scriptural injunctions are with reference to the conditioned state of the Self. By nature it is inactive, and it becomes active only through a connection with its Upadhis (adjuncts), the mind etc. The objection that if the soul is not an agent by nature, the Sruti injunctions will be meaningless, does not stand, for these script- ures do not aim at establishing it, but merely refer to an agency already existing is a result of ignorance.

on the Lord.

GUTS THA: ll BE I

uwq From the Supreme Lord q but a4 that (agency) 4a: so declares the Sruti.

2.8.42] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 261

41. But (even) that (agency of the soul) is from the Supreme Lord; so declares the Sruti.

The agency of the soul is also due to the Supreme Lord. The soul does good and bad deeds, being so directed by the Lord. ‘‘He makes those whom He will raise do good deeds’? (Kau. 3. 8). It is through His giace that the soul attains to Knowledge and becomes iree.

RTA fafeanfafearaeataes: er

aanza-waq; Depends on works done ¥ but fafea- ufafrg-wdaeties: on account of the relevancy of injunctions and prohibitions etc.

42. But (the Lord’s making the soul act) depends on works done (by it); (thus cnly would) injunctions and prohibitions etc. be relevant.

This Sutra refutes a possible doubt that since the Lord makes some persons do good and others evil, He must be cruel and whimsical. It says, that the Lord always directs the soul according to its good or bad deeds in previous births. And Samsara being without beginning, there will always be previous births, with actions done in them, for the guidance of the Lord. So He cannot be accused of being cruel and whimsical. It is thus alone that the scriptural injunctions and prohibitions can have any meaning;

for otherwise the Jiva will gain nothing by observing

these injunctions. | This does not however mar the independence of

the Lord, though it may be said that since He

depends on the acts of the soul, He is not free to do

what He likes; for a king who presents or punishes

His subjects according to their acts does not cease to be a sovereign thereby.

Brahman.

sigh aTaTeqgaara, sere aria amifadatfecaneiaa TH || 33 Il

sig; Part armaqentq on account of difference being declared Wwat otherwise 4 and wy also aH- facafeaqq being fishermen, knaves, ctc. witud read wa some (Sakhas of the Vedas).

43. (The soul is) part (of the Lord) on account of difference (between the two) being declared and otherwise also (i.e. as non-different from Brahman); for in some (Sakhas or recensions of the Vedic texts) (Brahman) is spoken of as being fisher- men, knaves, ete.

In the last topic it has been shown that the Lord rules the soul. This brings us to the question of the relation between the two. Is it that of master and servant, or as between fire and its sparks? The

2.3.45] BRAHLIA-SUTRAS 263

Sutra seys that the retation is as between fire and its sparks, that is, of whole and part. But then, the soul is not actually a part. but a part, as it were— an imagined part, for Brahman cannot have any parts. Why then should it be taken as a part and not identical with the Lord? Because the scriptures declare a difference hetween them in texts like, ‘Knowing It alone one becomes a sage’’ (Brih, 4. 4. 22), ‘fhe Atman is to be seen”’ (Brih. 2. 4. 5). This difference, however, is spoken of from the empirical standpoint; from the absclute standpoint they are identical. The text, ‘‘Brahman is the fishermen, Brahman the slaves, Brahman these knaves,’’ etc. shows that even such humble perrons as these are in reality Brahman.

HAIN || ve aaaquia From the words of the Mantra 4 also. 44, Also from the words of the Mantra (it is known that the soul 1s a part of the Lord).

A further reason is given to show that the soul is a part of the Lord. ‘‘One foot of it are all these beings’? (Chh. 3. 12. 6)—where beings, including souls, are said to be a foot or part of the Lord.

ata & ENsa ti v4 tl wig Also 4 and waa it is (so) stated in the Smriti. 45. And it is also (so) stated in the Smriti.

An eternal portion of myself having become a

living soul’? (Gita 15. 7).

THIN aets FW i Ve tl

waraifer Like light etc. 4 is not v4 like this 9¢: the Supreme Lord.

46. The Supreme Lord is not (affected by pleasure and pain) like this (individual soul), even as light etc. (are not affected by the shape of the things they touch).

If the soul is a part of the Lord, the question may arise that the Lord also experiences pleasure and pain like the soul, even as a cloth is soiled if its threads are soiled. This Sutra refutes it and says that the Lord does not experience pleasure and pain like the soul, which on account of ignorance identifies itself with the body and mind, and thereby partakes of their pleasure and pain. Just as the light of the sun, which is all-pervading, becomes straight or bent by coming in contact with particular objects, or as the ether enclosed in a jar seems to move when the jar 1s moved, or as the sun appears to tremble when the water in which it is reflected trembles, but in reality none of them undergoes those changes, so also is the Lord not affected by pleasure and pain, which are experienced by that imagined part of it, the individual soul, which is a product of ignorance and is limited by the Buddhi etc.

encfra ST | vo 4

2.3.49] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 265

aia The smritis stute @ and.

47. The Smritis also state (that).

‘‘Of the two, the Supreme Self is said to be eternal and. devoid of qualities. It is not touched by the fruits of actions any more than a jutus leaf is by water....’’ Smriti texts like this declare that the Supreme Lord does not experience pleasure and pain. The Srutis too do the saine.

agaiqent fearerssatacieaa lt Be tl

wamafent Injunctions and prohibitions Seamaq on account of the connection with the body faafe- aq like light etc.

48. Injunctions and prohibitions (are possible) on account of the connection (of the Self) with the body; as in the case of light etc.

Even though the Self is one and indescribable, and with reference to it there can be no injunctions and prohibitions, yet as connected with a body, such injunctions and prohibitions are possible. Fire is one; but the fire of the funeral pyre is rejected, and that of a sacrifice is accepted. Similar is the case with the Atman.

saqraaarsafawnc: || Be ll

waaa: Non-extension (beyond its own body) 4 and wafant: there is no confusion (of results of actions).

49, And on account of the non-exten- sion (of the soul beyond its own body) there is no confusion (of results of actions).

An objection is raised that on account of the unity of the Self there would result a confusion of the results of actions; that is, everyone would get the results of the actions of everyone else. This Sutra refutes such a possibility; for an individualized soul means the connection of the Atman with a particular body, mind, etc., and since these are not overlapping, the individual souls are different from each other. Hence there is no such possibility of confusion.

ATATA TT] ST || &o Il wre A reflection v4 only 4 and.

50. And (the individual soul is) only a reflection (of the Supreme Lord).

According to Vedanta the individual soul is but a reflection, an image, of the Supreme Lord in Its Upadhi (adjunct), the Antahkarana (inner organ). So the reflections of the Lord in different Antah- karanas are different, even as the reflections of the sun in different sheets of water are different. There- fore just as the trembling of a particular reflection of the sun does not cause the other reflections to tremble so also the experiencing of happiness and misery by a particular Jiva or individualized soul is not shared by other souls. Hence there can be no confusion of the results of action.

2.3.52] BRAPMA-SUTRAS 267

ARTHAS | 42 Nl

wee-wiqaata There being no fixity about the unseen principle.

51. There being no fixity about the unseen principle (there would result that confusion for those who believe in many souls, each all-pervading).

The Sankhyas, the Varseshikas and the Naiya- yikas accept a plurality of souls, each of which is ali- pervading. Under such circumstances there cannot but result a confusiou of the fruits of action, for each soul is present everywhere, in close proximity to whatever caus@g those results in tue shape of happi- ness or misery. Nor can this confusion be avoided by introducing the Adrishta or unseen principle, which is resigious merit and demerit acquired by the souls. According to the Sankhyas it inheres net in the soul, but in the Pradhana, which is common to all souls, and as such there is nothing to fix that a particuiar Adrishta operates in a particular soul. According to the other two schools the unseen princi- ple is created by the conjunction of the soul with the mind; and since every soul is all-pervading and there- fore equally connected with all minds, here also there is nothing to fix that a particular Adrishta belongs to a particular soul. Hence that confusion of results is inevitable.

sfrarcarfgeata Baz tl G2 It

wfteenfzy In resolve etc. “fe even 4 and waH like this.

a

52. And even as regards resolve etc. (it would be) like this.

If it be maintained that the resolve etc. one makes to achieve something or to avoid something will allocate the Adrishta to particular souls, even then there will be this confusion. For resolve etc. are also formed by the conjunction of the soul and the mind. Hence the same argument applies here also.

Sutras 51-53 refute the doctrine of the Sankhyas and other schools about the plurality gf souls each of which is all-pervading. It leads to absurdities.

samfafa Sa, a, aeratara tt &3 tt

yeurq From (difference of) place fa 4q@ if it be said 4 not so wetqq on account of the self being in all bodies.

53. If it be said (that the distinction of pleasure and pain etc. results) from (the difference of) place, (we say) not so, on account of the self being in all bodies.

The Naiydyikas and others try to get over the diffi- culty shown in the previous Sutra thus: Though each soul is all-pervading, yet if we take its connec- tion with the mind to take place in that part of it which is limited by its body, then such a confusion

2.8.58] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 269

is not lixely. Even this cannot stand; since every soul is all-pervading and therefore permeates all bodies, and thére 1s nothing to fix that a particular body belongs to a particular soul. Again there can- not be mere than one all-pervading entity; if there were, they would limit each otner and consequently cease to be all-pervading or infinite. Hence there is only one Self and nat mary. The plurality of selves in Vedania is only a product of ignorance and not a reality.


CHAPTER II
----------

[Section IV]

In the third section it has been shown that.ether and the other elements are produced from Brahman, by reconciling the apparently contradictory texts of ‘the Srutis with respect to their origination. In this section the Sutras take up for discussion texts that deal with the origination of the senses etc.

AAT ATUT: tz | aut Likewise wat: the organs.

1. Likewise the organs (are produced from Brahman).

In the scriptures, in those sections which treat of the origin of things, we do not find the origination of the organs etc. mentioned. On the other hand, there are texts like, ‘“This was indeed non-existence in the beginning. They say: What was non- existence in the beginning? Those Rishis.... Who are those Rishis? The Pranas (organs) are indeed the Rishis’? (Sat. Br. 6. 1. 1. 1), which show that the organs are eternal and not created.

This Sutra refutes that view and says that the organs etc. are produced just like ether etc. from

2.4.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 271

Brahman. The word ‘likewise’ refers. not to the immediately preceding topic of the last section, which is the plurality" of souls, but to the creation of ether etc. spoken of in the last section. Sruti texts directly declare iheir origination. ‘“‘From that (Self) are produced the vital force, mind, and all the organs’’ (Mu.2. 1. 8). Therefore the senses are created.

HOGARTATA Ul 2 Ul atet Secondary sense wrvata being impossible.

2. On account of the impossibility (of explaining the origination in a) secondary sense.

Since there are texts like the one quoted from the Sat. Br. which speak of the existence of the organs before creation, why not explain the texts which describe their creation in a secondary sense? This Sutra refutes it, for a secondary sense would lead to the abandonment of the general assertion, “By the knowledge of one, everything else is known.”’ Therefore they are produced from Brahman. The reference to the existence of the Pranas (organs) before creation in Sat. Br. is concerning Hiranya- garbha, which is not resolved in the partial dissolution of the world, though all other effects are resolved. Even Hiranyagarbha is resolved, however, in complete dissolution (Mahapralaya).

| ACATRTAET 3

aq That oa first 4: being mentioned 4 and.

3. And because that (the verb denot- ing origin) is mentioned first (in connec- tion with the Pranas).

The text referred to is: “From that (Self) are prod- uced the vital force, mind and all the organs, ether, air, water, fire, and earth”? (Mu. 2. 1. 8). Here the word ‘produced’ occurs at the very beginning of the things enumerated, and if it is interpreted in its primary sense with respect to ether etc., it is all the more to be so interpreted with respect to the vital force, mind, and organs mentioned earlier. Thus a further reason is given in this Sutra to show that the organs etc. have originated from Brahman.

AUST HCTTSTA: U1 BI ara; Of the organ of speech (etc.) aeqaaaa being preceded by them (the elements).

4. QOn account of the pre-existence of that (viz. the elements) (before) the organ of speech (etc.).

“For truly, my boy, mind consists of earth, the vital force of water, the vocal organ of fire’’ (Chh. 6. 5. 4). This text clearly shows that the organs etc. are products of the elements, which in their turn spring from Brahman. Hence they too are products of Brahman. Being products of the elements, they are not separately mentioned in texts dealing with the origin of things.

2.4.6] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 278

an, Tafeafeacara tt 4

wy Seven wa: being so known (from the script- ures ) faafararqa on acccunt of the specification 4 and.

5. (The organs are) seven (in number), because it is so known (from the scriptures) and on account of the specification (of those seven).

The number oi the organs is ascertained in this and the next Sutra. This Sutra, which gives the view of the opponent, declares that there are seven organs. ‘The seven Pranas (organs) spring from It’’ (Mu. 2. 1. 8). These are again specified in another text, ‘Seven indeed are the Pranas (organs) in the head”? (Taitt. Sam. 5. 1. 7. 1). No doubt in some texts eight or even more organs are enumerated, but these are to be explained as modifications of the inner organ, and so there is no contradiction in the Sruti texts if we take the number as seven.

qeaTaaeg, feasat Fam & eazy: Hands ete. g but fea being a fact Wa: therefore 4 not T44q like this.

6. But hands etc. (are also referred to as sense-organs in scriptural texts).

Since this is a fact, therefore (it is) not

like this (1.e. they are not merely seven in number).

‘But’ refutes the view of the previous Sutra.

‘The hands are the Graha (organs)’’ etc. (Brih. 8. 2. 8). Such texts show that the hands etc. are addition- al sense-organs. Therefore to the seven already enu- merated, viz. eyes, nose, ears, tongue, touch, speech, and inner organ, four others, viz. hands, feet, anus, ‘and the organ of generation, have to be added. In all, therefore, there are eleven organs. The different modifications of the inner organ, viz. mind, intellect, ego, and Chitta (memory), are not separate organs, and therefore cannot raise the number beyond eleven, which is therefore the number fixed. These are: the five organs of knowledge, the five organs of action, and the inner organ.

ATI | 8 il

waa: Minute 4 and.

7. And (they are) minute.

The organs are minute. ‘Minute’ does not mean atomic, but fine and limited in size. It is because they are subtle that they are not seen. If they were all-pervading, then texts which speak of their passing out of the body and going and coming along with the soul at death and birth would be contradicted. More- ever, we do not perceive through the senses what 1s happening throughout the universe, which would be

2.4.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 275

the case if they were iil-pervading. Hence they are all subtle and limited in size.

created from Brahman.

ToT tl <A aw; The chief Prana (vital force) 4 and.

8. And the chief Prana (vital force) (is also produced).

“‘From this (Self) is produced the vital force’’ Mu. 2. 1. 8): again we have, ‘‘By Its own law It alone was moving without wind (the vital force)’’ (Rig-Veda 10. 129. 2). Here the words ‘‘was moving’’ seem to refer to the function of the vital force, and so it must have existed before creation and was therefore not created. Hence there appears to be a contradiction with respect to its origination. This Sutra says that even the vital force is produced from Brahman. The words ‘‘was moving’’ are qualified by ‘without wind’ and so does not intimate that the vital force existed before creation. It only intimates the Brahman, the Cause, existed before creation, as is known from texts like ‘Existence alone was there before this’? (Chh. 6. 2. 1). It is called the. ‘chief’, because it functions before all other Pranas and senses, i.e. from the very moment the child is conceived, and also on account of its superior qualities; ‘‘We shall not be able to live without

from air and sense functions.

aq angina, geeaeerra it & tl

a ayia Not air nor function 37% separately Syeatq on account of its being mentioned.

9. (The chief Prana) is neither air nor any function (of the organs) on account of its being mentioned separately.

In this Sutra the nature of the chief Prana is discussed. The opponent holds that there is no separate principle called Prana, but that it is only air and nothing else, which exists in the mouth as well as outside. The Sruti also says, ‘‘That vital force is air.”’ Or it may be the combined effect of the functions of all the eleven organs. Just as a number of birds in a cage, when they move, also move the cage, so also the eleven organs functioning together constitute hfe in the body. So the resultant of these functions is Prana. This is the view of the Sankhyas. Hence there is no separate principle called Prana (vital force).

The Sutra refutes these views and says that Prana is a separate principle, for it is mentioned separately from air and the sense functions. ‘‘The Prana (vital force) indeed is the fourth foot of Brahman. That foot shines and warms as the light called air’? (Chh. 3. 18. 4), where it is distinguished from air. Again, ‘From that (Self) are produced

2.4.10] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 277

the vital force, mind, and all the organs’? (Mu. 2.1.8), which shows that it is not a function of any organ, for in that case it would not have been separated from the organs. The text, ‘“‘The vital force is air,”’ is also correct, inasmuch as the effect is but the cause in another furm and the vital force is air func- tioning within the body (Adhyatma). The analogy of the birds in a cage is not to the point, for they all have the same kina of activity, viz. movement, which is favourable to the motion cf the cage. But the functions of the organs are not of one kind, but different from one anothcr; and they are also of a distinct nature from that of the vital force. Hence they cannot constitute life. Therefore Prana (vital force) is a separate entity.

apyuiigard, acaafawarfara: fo tl

aqufeaq Like eyes etc. q but aq-ae-fieufed: on account of (its) being taught with them and other reasons.

10. But (Prana is subordinate to the soul) like eyes etc. on account of (its) being taught with them and for other reasons.

If the vital force is a separate entity from the organs, which are subordinate to it, then it, lke the soul, must also be independent in the body. The Sutra refutes this and says that the vital force is subordinate to the soul. Why? Because in the conversation of the Pranas which we find in the

Upanishads it is mentioned along with the sense- organs. Now in such grouping only those of a class are grouped together. So the vital force, like the organs, is subordinate to the soul. The other reasons referred to in the Sutra are its being composed of parts, its being insentient, and so on.

TRUNCITS aT ate:, are zerafa i v2 tl

wacvaatq On account of (its) not being an instru- ment ¥ and 4 not 9: objection aa fe because thus enafa (Sruti) teaches.

11. And on account of (its) not being an instrument (there is) no objection, because thus (the scripture) teaches.

If the vital force, like the organs is also sub- ordinate to the soul, then it must stand in the rela- tion of an instrument to the soul like the organs. But as there are only eleven functions and as many organs already, there is no room for a twelfth organ in the absence of a twelfth sense-object. This Sutra refutes the above objection and says that the vital force is not an instrument or organ like the eyes etc., for the acceptance of which a twelfth sense- object would be necessary; yet it has a function in the body which no sense-organ is capable of, and that is the upkeep of the body. In the text, ‘‘Pre- serves the unclean nest (of a body) with the help of the vital force’? (Brih. 4. 8. 12), the vital force is said to guard the body. Again, ‘‘From whatever

2.4.18] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 279:

limb the Prana goes, right there it withers’ (Brih. 1. &. 19); Whatever food one eats through the Prana satisfies these (the organs)’ (Brih. 1. 8. 18). All these texts shcw that the function of the vital force (Prana) is the upkeep of the body, unlike those of the organs.

Nor is this the only function of the vital force. There are others, tec, as tne next Sutra declares.

qqafadatagaafasat 22

qauafa: Having fivefolé function #faq like the mind =afewa it is taught.

12. It is taught as having a fivefold function like the mind.

‘IT alone dividing myself fivefold support this body and keep it”? (Pr. 2. 3). Fivefold, 7.e. as Prana, Apdna. Vyana, Udana, and Samana each of which has a special function, viz. breathing in, exhaling, functioning throughout the body and aid- ing feats of strength, helping the soul to pass out of the body, and digesting the food eaten and carrying it to all parts of the body. In this respect it resem- bles the inner organ, which though one has a four- fold aspect as mind, intellect, ego, and Chitta (memory).

ANAT tl 3 ll

aq: Minute 4 and.

13. And it is minute.

The vital force (Prana) is also minute, subtle, and limited like the senses. It may be objected that it is all-pervading according to the text: ‘‘Because he is equal to a gnat, equal to a mosquito, equal to an elephant, equal to these three worlds, equal to this universe’? (Brih. 1. 3. 22). But the all-pervading- ness spoken of here is with respect to Hiranyagarbha, the cosmic Prana. In its universal aspect it is all- pervading; but in relation to beings in the world, in its individual aspect with which we are concerned here, it is limited. Hence the vital force is also limited.

safacafasred g agaaard tl 22 tl

sifante-wfasia Presiding over by Fire and others q but a4-wAANA on account of the scriptures teach- ing that.

14. But there is the presiding over by Fire and others (over the organs), on account of the scriptural teaching about that.

The dependence or independence of the Prana and the organs is taken up for discussion: The scriptures say that these are presided over by the gods like Fire ete., which direct them. For example, ‘‘(Fire) having become speech entered the

2.4.16] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 281

mouth”? (Ait. Ar. 2. 4. 2. 4). The organs etc., being inert, cannot move of themselves. Hence they are dependent on tke presiding deities.

ATHTAT, NEAT t] &% Ii

yreaat With the one possessing the Pranas (organs) "Iq from the scriptures.

15. (The gods are not the enjoyers, but the soul, because the organs are connected) with the one (i.e. the soul) possessing them, (as is known) from the scriptures.

This Sutra makes it clear why the soul, and not the gods, is the enjoyer in the body. The relation betweer the soul and the organs is that of master and servant, so the scriptures declare; hence the enjoyment through the organs is of the soul, and not of the gods. ‘‘He who knows, ‘Let me smell this.’ is the self, the nose is the instrument of smell- ing’? (Chh. 8. 12. 4). Moreover, there are many gods in the body, each presiding over a particular organ, but there is only one enjoyer. Otherwise remem- brance would be impossible. Hence the senses are for the enjoyment of the soul and not the gods though they are directed by them.

| aea a frracata il 26 tl

aa Its 4 and faweata on account of permanence.

16. And on account of its (soul’s) permanence (in the body it is the enjoyer, and not the gods).

The soul abides permanently in the body as the experiencer since it can be affected by good and evil and can experience pleasure and pain. It is not reasonable to think that in a body which is the resulf of the soul’s past actions, others, e.g. the gods, enjoy. The gods have glorious positions and would disdain such Jowly enjoyments as can be had through the human body. It is the soul that is the enjoyer. Moreover, the connection between the organs and the soul is permanent. Vide Sruti text, ‘‘When it departs, the vital force follows; when the vital force departs, all other organs follow”’ (Brih. 4, 4. 2). The soul is the master, and is there- fore the enjoyer, in spite cf the fact that there are presiding deities over the senses.

and not modes of the chief Prana.

a afeaarftr, agrageng-at ATT tl 29 tt

@ They sfearfa organs astaemq being so desig- nated ¥8tq Wa except the chief.

17. They (the other Pranas) except the chief (Prana) are organs (and so different from the chief Prana), on account

2.4.19] ERAHMA-SUTRAS 283

of (their) being so designated (by the scriptures).

The question is raised whether the eyes etc. are but modes of the vital force or independent entities. The opponent holds the former view since the script- ure says, “‘ ‘This is the greatest amongst us (the organs).... Well, let us all be of his form.’ They all assumed its form. Therefore they are called by this name of ‘Prana’ ” (Brih. 1. 5. 21). The Sutra refutes this and says that the eleven organs belong to a separate category, and are not modes of the vital force, because they are shown to be different in texts like: “‘From Him are born, the vital force, mind, and all organs’’ (Mu. 2. 1. 8), where the vital force and the organs are separately mcntioned. The text of the Brihadéranyaka is to be taken in a secondary sense.

ABTA: tl Le

18. On account of differentiating scriptural texts.

In Brih. 1. 3. the organs are treated first in one section, and after concluding it the vital force is treated in a fresh section, which shows that they do not belong to the same category. Hence also the: organs are independent principles, and not modes of the vital force.

Aaavars || LE It

aqaurq On account of characteristic differences a and.

‘286 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [2.4.21

21. Flesh etc. result from earth, according to the scriptures. So also as regards the other two (v7z. fire and water).

Tripartite earth, when assimilated by man, forms flesh etc. ‘“‘The earth (food) when eaten becomes threefold,... its middle portion becomes flesh, and its finest portion mind’’ (Chh. 6. 5. 1). So also we have to understand the effects of the other two elements.according to the scriptures. Water produces blood, Prana, etc., and fire produces bone, marrow and the organ of speech.

ARTY TRAST: It 22 Il

terq On account of the preponderance 4 but aete: that special name.

22. But on account of the preponder- ance (of a particular element in them the gross elements) are so named (after it).

An objection is raised, if all the gross elements contain the three fine elements, then why such dis- tinctions as ‘This is water,’’ ‘‘This is earth,’ This is. fire??? The Sutra refutes this objection saying that as the fine elements are not found in equal proportion in each of the gross elements, they are named after that fine element which preponderates in their constitution. The repetition of “‘that special name’’ is to show that the chapter ends here.

CHAPTER IT SFCTION I

in the second chapter all objections based on the Sruti and reasoning against the Vedantic view have been refuted. Ili has been shown that ali other views are incorrect, and thet the so-called scriptural contradictions do not exist with respect to the Vedantic view. Further, it has been shown that all entities different from the soul (like Prana etc.) spring from Brahman and for the enjoyment of the soul. In this chapter the soul’s travels to the different regions accompanied by those adjuncts are discussed to produce a spirit of dispassion.

at death is enveloped with fine particles of the gross elements.

agacafagen tefa arafters:, satfae- TTA Ile tl azaafagat With a view to obtaining a fresh body fa goes aaftam enveloped (with subtle parts of the elements) safaeqaraty (so it is known) from the question and answer.

1. (The soul) goes (out of the body) enveloped (with subtle parts of the ele-

ments) with a view to obtaining a fresh body; (so it is known) from the question and answer (in the scripture).

The Sutra discusses whether in transmigration the soul takes with it subtle parts of the gross elements as the seed, as it were, for the future body. The opponent holds that it does not take them, for it is useless, because the elements are easily available everywhere. Moreover, in the absence of a definite opinion to the contrary in the scriptures, we have to understand that the soul does not take subtle parts of the elements with it. This Sutra refutes that view and says that the soul does take with it subtle parts of the elements; that this is a fact is known from the question and answer that occurs in the scriptures. ‘‘Do you know why in the fifth oblation water is called man?’’ (Chh. 5. 3. 8). This is the question, and the answer is given in the whole passage which, after explaining how the five obla- tions in the form, of Sraddha (liquid oblations in subtle form), Soma, rain, food, and seed are offered in the five ‘fires’ (i.e. objects imagined to be fires for the sake of Upasana)—-the heavens, Parjanya (rain-god), earth, man, and woman—ends, ‘‘For this reason is water in the fifth oblation called man.”’ From this we understand that the soul goes enveloped with water (same as Sraddha). Moreover, though the elements are available everywhere, yet the seeds for a future body are not so easily available. Again the adjuncts of the individual soul, viz. the organs etc.

3.1.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 289

which go with it (Vice Brih. 4. 4. 2) cannot accom- pany it unless therc is a material basis.

SUTCAHCATS FART | 2 A

anranar On account of (water) consisting of. three elements 9 but qatatqy on accouit of the pre- ponderance (of water).

2. On account of (water) consist- ing of three elements (the soul goes envel- oped by all these elements and not merely water); but (water alone is mentioned in the text) on account of its preponderance (in the human body).

An objection is raised that the text mentions. only water, and not the other elements as accom- panying the soul. The Sutra says that in water are found the other two elements also according to the tripartite creation of the gross elements. Hence all the three elements accompany the soul. The mention of water is indicatory, and includes all the elements. With mere water no body can be formed. But as the watery portion in the body is prepon- derant, water only is mentioned in the text.

TTONTAST I 3 tl

ylUaad: Because of the goyng of the sense-organs

a and.

3. And because of the going of the organs (with the soul, the elements also accompany the soul).

‘When it departs, the vital force follows. When the vital force departs, all the organs follow’’ (Brih. 4. 4, 2). Since the organs go with the soul, they must have a material base; hence also it is inferred that water and other elements follow the soul, thus forming a basis for the organs.

sreatiqnioadaltia Sq, 4, ATHATE IB Ul

wanfeafa: Entering into fire etc. qd: from the scriptures sfa Wq if it be said 4 not so wHalq on account of its being so said in a secondary sense.

4. If it be said (that the organs do not follow the soul), for the scriptures declare their entering into fire etc., (we say) not so, on account of its being so said in a secondary sense.

‘“When the vocal organ of a man who dies is merged in the fire, the nose in the air,”’ ete. (Brih. 8. 2. 18). This text shows that at the time of death the organs are resolved into their presiding deities, and hence it cannot be said that they accompany the soul. This Sutra refutes that view and says that such interpretations would go against many texts which declare that they do accompany the soul, as, for example: ‘‘When it departs, the vital force

8.1.5] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 291

follows; when the vital force departs, all the organs follow”? (Brih. 4. 4. 2). Hence the text cited must be interpreted in a secondary sense like the words, ‘“The hair on the body in the herbs’? (Brih. 3. 2. 18).

suassaonfafa Bq, a, at aa fe, SATS: |e

waa In the first of the oblations wyamq not being mentioned 3ff @q if it be said 4 not so @: va that only (‘.e. water) fe because 8947: on account of the appropriateness.

5. If it be objected on account of (water) not being mentioned in the first of the oblations, {we say) nut so, because that (viz. water) only (is meant by the word ‘Sraddha’) on account of the appro- priateness (of such an interpretation).

An objection is raised that as there is no men- tion of water in the first oblation: ‘On that altar the gods offer Sraddha as oblation’’? (Chh. 5. 4. 2), but only Sraddha (faith) is mentioned, to substitute water for Sraddha will be arbitrary. So how can it be ascertained ‘‘that in the fifth oblation water is called man.’’ The Sutra says that by ‘Sraddha’ water is meant, for in that case alone syntactical unity of the whole passage remains undisturbed. Otherwise the question and answer would not agree. Moreover, faith (Sraddha), which is a mental attri- bute, cannot be offered as an oblation. Water is also

called Sraddha in the Sruti texts: ‘‘Sraddha indeed is water’’ (Taitt. Sam. 1. 6. 8. 1).

anqacarfata Aq, a, serfgenricort seta: néN

waaay On account of not being mentioned in the Sruti #fa 37 if it be said 4 not so seifemfiwa the performers of sacrifices etc. wat: being understood.

6. If it be said that on account of (the soul) not being mentioned in the text (the soul does not depart enveloped with water etc.), (we say) not so, for it is under- stood (from the scriptures) that the Jivas who perform sacrifices etc. (alone go to heaven).

An objection is raised that in the Chhandogya text cited (5. 3. 3), there is mention of water only but no reference to the soul; and it is explained how this water becomes man. So how can it be taken that the soul departs enveloped with water and then is born again as man? This Sutra refutes it and says that if we examine all the scriptural texts like, ‘‘But they who being in the village practise sacrifices and works of public utility and give alms, go to the (deity of) smoke... to the moon”’ (Chh. 5, 10. 3-4), which describe the journey to the moon, we find that only the Jivas who perform such good acts go to heaven, and that in so doing they go enveloped with water, which is supplied by the materials like curds etc. that are offered as oblations in sacrifices;

3.1.7) RRAHMA-SUTRAS 298

these assume a subtle form called Apurva and attach themselves to the sacrificer.

ane ararenfseara, vat fe astafe no 0

wit’ In a secondary sense a but warafreny on account of their (souls) not knowing the Self aa so f because exufa (Sruti) declares.

7. But (the souls’ being the food of the gods in heaven is used) in a secondary sense, on account of their not knowing the Self; because (the Sruti) declares like that.

In the scriptures it is stated that those who go to heaven become the food of the gods; so how could they be enjoying the fruits of their good actions in heaven? ‘That is Soma, the king. He is the food. of the gods. They eat him’’ (Chh. 5. 10. 4). This Sutra says that the word ‘food’ is used not in a primary sense, but metaphorically, meaning an object of enjoyment. Otherwise, if this is the fate of souls who so to heaven, texts like, ‘‘Those who want to go to heaven shall perform sacrifices’’ are meaningless. Therefore what the text means is that they are objects of enjoyment to the gods even as wives, children, and cattle are to men. Thus the Jivas, while giving enjoyment to the gods, are happy, and rejoice with them in their turn. That they are objects of enjoyment to the gods is known from texts like: ‘‘While he who worships another deity...

He is like a beast to the gods. And as many beasts serve a man, so does every man serve the gods’’

Therefore it is decided that the soul goes envel- oped with subtle parts of the elements when it goes to other spheres for enjoying the fruits of its good Karma.

residual Karma, which determines their birth.

waTaa Squaara, FreT fea, ata TT cit

aaraa On the exhaustion of (good) work ‘Wasa possessed of residual Karma ez@faenq as is known from the Sruti and Smriti aa s@ as (it) went vwaaq differently 4 and.

8. On the exhaustion of (good) work (the soul) with the residual Karma (de- scends to this earth), as is known from the Sruti and Smriti, along the path (it) went by (from here) and differently too.

A fresh topic is taken up for discussion—the descent of the soul from heaven. The question is raised whether it descends with any residual Karma or not. The opponent holds that there is no residual Karma, for Sruti says: ‘‘Having dwelt there till their work is consumed, they return again the way they went by’’ etc. (Chh. 5. 10. 5), which means that all their Karma is exhausted and there is nothing left. Moreover, it is reasonable to think that Karma

8.1.8] RRAHMA-SUTRAS 205

done in one life ‘as man) is worked out in the next as god.

The Sutra, refuting this view, says that what is exhausted in heaven is only that Karma which gave the soul a birth as god in heaven, but on the exhaus- tion of this Karma the remaining Karma, good and bad, brings it back to varth. GQtherwise it is diffi- cult to explain the happiness or misery of a new- born child. Neither is it possible that in one life the entire Karma of the previcus life is worked out. For a man might have done both good work hike sacri- fices, as a result of which he is born as a god, and bad work, which can be worked out in an animal body; and the working out of both kinds of Karma simultaneously in one birth is impossible. So though by the enjoyment of heaven the result of good work like sacrifices etc. is exhausted, there are other Karmas in store according to which a man is born again in good or bad environments. The Sruti says, “Those whose conduct has been yood will quickly attain some good birth’’ etc. (Chh. 5. 10. 7). The Smriti also savs, ‘“With the remainder of their Karma they are born in a noteworthy place, caste, and family, with becoming appearance, longevity, knowl- edge, wealth, happiness, and intellect.”? So the soul is born with residual Karma. By what way does it descend? Following the same way that it went by, but with some difference. That they follow the same way as they went by, is understood from the mention of smoke and ether in the path, (Vide

Chh. 5. 10. 5), and that there is some difference too is known from the fact that the text omits night etc. (Vide Chh. 5. 10. 8), but mist etc. are mentioned

acnifata Ba, a, sass fat sreurt- fafa: ue tt

acurq On. account of conduct #fa 44 if it be said 4 not so syrewet to denote indirectly fa thus arutfafa: (the sage) Karshnajini (thinks'.

9. Ifit be said that on account of con- duct (the assumption of residual Karma 1s not necessary for a rebirth on earth), (we say) not so, (for the word ‘conduct’ is used) to denote indirectly (the remaining Karma). So (thinks) Karshnajini.

In the text cited (Chh. 5. 10. 7) the Sruti says those of ‘good conduct’ get a good birth. Now conduct is one thing, and residual Karma quite another thing, even according to the Sruti (Vide Brih. 4. 4. 5). Since the Sruti does not mention residual Karma, the soul is not born with any Karma, conduct alone being the cause of good birth. This is the main objection. This the Sutra refutes and says that ‘conduct’ here is used to denote good Karma. It is a case of Ajahat Lakshané, conduct standing for Karma which is dependent on good conduct. This is the view of the sage Karshnajini.

3.1.11] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 297 arate Aa, a, ATA it Lo Ul

wraay Irreievancy <fa 3 if it be said 4 not so aeqeay on account of dependence on that.

10. If it be said (by such interpreta- tion of the word ‘conduct’ good conduct would become) purposeless, (we say} not so, on account of (Karma) being depend- ent on that (good conduct).

An objection is raised that if the word ‘conduct’ be interpreted indirectly to meeu ‘residual Karma’, leaving its direct meaning, then good conduct would be purposeless in man’s life, as it has no result of its own, net being a cause of the quality of the new birth. The Sutra denies this on the yround that only those who are of good conduct are ex- pected to perforin Vedic sacrifices. ‘‘Him who is devoid of good conduct the Vedas do not purify.”’ Thus good conduct is an aid to Karma and therefore has a purpose. So it is the view of Karshnajini that it is Karma and not conduct that is the cause of the new birth.

ghagna cata g arate: nee

gaagaa Good and evil work v4 merely fa thus q but atef<: Badari.

11. But (conduct) is merely good and evil work; thus (the sage) Badari (thinks).

This Sutra says that as a matter of fact there is no difference between conduct and Karma in common parlance, for people say of a person who performs sacrifices etc. ‘That man practises righteous- ness,"? showing thereby that ‘conduct’ is used in the general sense of action. Thus ‘men of good conduct’ means those whose actions (Karma) are praiseworthy.

Therefore it is settled that those who go to heaven performing sacrifices have residual Karma as the cause of a new birth on earth.

actions do not entitle them to go to the lunar world.

afratiganticorraty a srarz it 2 tl

wfaefeatfeary Of those who do not perform sacri- fices etc. “fY even 4 also 344 is declared by the Sruti.:

12. The Sruti declares (the going to the lunar world etc.) also of even those who do not peform sacrifices etc.

Now the question of those who do not per- form sacrifices etc. is taken up for discussion. The opponent holds that even they go to heaven, though they may not enjoy there like the performers of sacrifices etc., because they too require the fifth oblation for a new birth, and also because the script- ures directly say that all go to heaven: ‘‘All who depart from this world go to the moon”’ (Kau. 1. 2).

3.1.14] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 299

aaa canplataamwierael, aga aATT U4

aaa In the abode of Yama q but wayqa having experienced vatata of others (than che performers of sacrifices etc.) WPA! the ascent and descent aia eaiaq such a passage beang declared by the Sruti.

13. But of others (2.e. those whe have not performed sacrifices etc.) the ascent is to the abode of Yama, and after having experienced (the result. of their evil works) the descent (to the earth again takes place). On account of such a passage (for the evil doer) being declared by the Sruti.

This Sutra refutes the view of the last Sutra and says that evil-doers go not to heaven, but to the world of Yama, where they suffer and then descend again to earth. ‘‘The hereafter never rises before an ignorant person... thus he falls again and again under my sway”? (Kath. 1. 2. 6). The ascent to the moon is only for the enjoyment of the fruits of good works and not for any other purpose; so the evil-doers do not go there.

Sacha A Il 2s tl

ava The Smritis declare 4 also.

14. The Smritis also declare (thus).

Manu and others say that the evil-doers go to hell and suffer there.

afta Seq ty 8% Il

wf 4 Moreover 88 seven.

15. Moreover there are seven (hells).

There are seven hells mentioned in the Puranas, to which the evil-doers are cast to expiate their sins through suffering.

aarfy = agararcrafacta: 2§ tt

aa There 4f@ even @ and a-aIqma on account of his contro! “faite: there is no contradiction.

16. And on account of his (Yama’s) control even there (in those hells), there is no contradiction.

An objection is raised that since according to the Sruti the evil-doers suffer at the hands of Yama how is this possible in the hell called Raurava, where Chitragupta is the presiding deity. The Sutra says that there is no contradiction, as Chitragupta is directed by Yama.

faaranoniftfa 4 THAcATA HH LO II

faaraami; Of knowledge and work fa thus q but yHMAaTY on account of their being the subject under discussion.

17. But (the reference is to the two roads) of knowledge and work; thus (we have to understand) on account of their being the subject under discussion.

8.1.18] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 801

Now those wno go along neither of these ways

become those tiny, continually rotating creatures of which it may be said, ‘Re born and die.’ This is the third piace. That is why that world (heaven) never becomes full’? (Chh. 5. 10. 8). The two ways men- tioned in this text we have to take as referring to those of knowledge ana work, on sccount of these being the subject under discussion. Knowledge and work are thc mean: to go along the Devayana and Pitriyana routes. For those who are not entitled to’ go through knowledge elong the Devaydna, the route leading to the gods, or through sacrifices ete. to the Pitriyana, the route leading to the fathers, the Sruti declares a third place, distinct from the Brahmaloka and the Chandraloka. That the evil- doers, who form a separate group, go to this third place, end not to heaven, is made all the more explicit by the words, ‘That is why that world (heaven) never becomes full’ (Chh. 5. 10. 8). The word ‘but’ refutes a possible doubt arising from a text belonging to another Sakh@; vide Kau. 1. 2. So the Kau- shitaki text which says that all go to the sphere of the moon, means all those who have performed good Karma of whatever kind, and does not include evil-doers.

A TAA, AMAT: | Le |

a Not @a@4 in the third al so Suwa: it being seen.

18. (The specification about five

oblations does) not (apply) to the third (place), for so it is seen (from the scrip- tures).

It has been said in Chh. 5. 8. 8, which is quoted in the first Sutra of this section, that the Jiva attains a new birth after five oblations. So at least for getting a new body the evil-doer will have to go _ to the moon, to complete the five oblations that cause the new birth. This Sutra says that the rule about the five oblaticns does not apply in the case~of evil-doers, for they are born irrespective of the obla- tions, because the Sruti says, ‘ ‘Be born and die.’ This is the third place.’’ That rule applies only to the performers of sacrifices etc.

SATASHT ST BF 1 VEN

aya Are recorded Wa also 4 and @f& in the world.

19. And moreover (cases of birth without the completion of the five obla- tions) are recorded in the world.

A further argument is given to show that the five oblations are not absolutely necessary for a future birth, and hence the evil-doers need not go to heaven just for conforming to this rule. For in cases like that of Drona, who had no mother, and of Dhrishtadyumna, who had neither father nor mother, the last two oblations respectively were absent. Hence the rule about the five oblations is not

8.1.21] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 303

universal, but apyiies only to those who perform sacrifices.

SATS lt 2° Il eumq On account of observation 4 also. 20. Also on account of cbservation.

That this rule abuut the five oblations is not universal is also seen from the fact that of the four kinds of life, viviparous, oviparous, life springing from moisture, and plant life, the last two are born without any mating and consequently there is not the fifth oblation in their case.

BaANSTITNA: SPM ARAST | VF I

adta-mee-waaty: Inclusion in the third term aan of tha: which springs from moisture.

21. The third term (ie. plant life) includes that which springs from moisture.

There are four kinds of organic beings as describ- ed in the last Sutra. But the Chhandogya Upanishad 6. 38. 1 mentions only three kinds., This Sutra says that it makes no difference for that which springs from moisture is included in plant life (Udbhid), since they both germinate, one from the earth and the other from water etc.

Hence it is a settled fact that the evil-doers do not go to heaven but only those who perform sacrifices.

not become identified with ether etc. but attains similarity of nature.

ACATATSATAPA:, SATA: tt 2 Il

aqemaa-aafy; Attainment of a similarity of nature with them suqq: being reasonable.

22. (The soul when descending from Chandraloka) attains similarity of nature with them (i.e. with ether, air, etc.), (that alone) being reasonable.

It has been said that the righteous who descend from the moon descend by the same path as they ascended by, but with some differences. ‘‘They return again that way as they came by, to the ether, from the ether to the air; the sacrificer having become air, becomes smoke,”’ etc. (Chh. 5. 10. 5). Now the question is whether the souls of such persons actually attain identity with ether, smoke, etc., or only attain a similar nature. The Sutra says that the souls do not attain identity with them, for it is impossible. A thing cannot become another of a different nature. What the text means, therefore, is that it attains similarity of nature—becomes like ether, air, etc. The soul assumes a subtle form like ether, comes under the influence of air and is connected with smoke, etc. Therefore similarity of nature and not identity is meant.

8.1.24] RRAHMA-SUTRAS 805

only a short time.

anfafazor, faratera ti 22 Hl

4 Not wfafatw in very long time fama on account of the special declaration.

23. (The soul’s descent from the moon through the varicus stages up to the earth takes) not very long time, on account of a special declaration (of the Srutis with respect to the stages after that as taking time).

The question is raised whether the descending soul, when it attains similarity of nature with ether, air, etc., remains in those stages pretty long, or attains the next stages quickly one after another. This Sutra says that it passes through them quickly. ‘‘Then he is born as rice and corn, herbs and trees, sesamum and beans. From thence the escape is beset with many more difficulties’? (Chh. 5. 10. 6). Thus the stages after coming down on earth through rain the Sruti particularly characterizes as hard to escape from, thereby hinting that the escape from the earlier stages is easy and attained quickly.

they only get connected with them and do not ‘participate in their life.

aearfatea yaaa, afrerara i 2

wa-afufsa Into what is ruled by another qaaq as in the previous cases Wrenumq for so the Sruti States.

24. (The descending soul enters) into what is ruled by another (Jiva or soul) as in the previous cases (viz. becoming ether etc.); for so the Sruti states.

A view is put forward that the soul’s passage through the stages of corn etc. is not a mere con- nection with them, as in the earlier stages with ether etc., but that it is actually born in the form of corn etc. For the Sruti says, ‘‘Then he is born as rice’’ etc. (Chh. 5. 10. 6). It also seems reasonable that those who fall from heaven after having exhaust- ed their good deeds should be born as herbs, plants, etc., owing to their bad Karma such as the killing of animals that remains. So the word ‘born’ is to be taken literally.. The Sutra refutes this view and says that the word ‘born’ implies mere connection with corn, herbs, etc., which are animated by other souls actually born as such. For in these stages there is no reference to their Karma, even as in the earlier stages of ether etc. They enter these plants etc. independently of their Karma, and while there, they do not experience the fruits at all. Where birth in the primary sense takes place and experience of the fruits of action begins, it is made clear by a reference to Karma, as in, “Those whose conduct has been good will quickly attain a good birth’’

3.1.26) BRAHMA-SUTRAS 807

(Chh. 5. 10. 7).. Therefore the descending souls only dwell, as it were, in plants etc. animated by other souls till they get the opportunity for a new birth.

agafafa Aq, a, egg i 24 It

wzqq Unholy 2f4 aa if it be said 4 not so we on account of scriptural authority,

25. If it be said (that sacrifices, which entail the killing of animals etc.) are unholy, (we say) not so, on account of scriptural authority.

This Sutra refutes the point raised by the opponent in the previous Sura that the descending soul is enveloped by its bad Karma such us the killing of animals in sacrifices and so is born as herbs ete. The killing of animals etc. in sacrifices does not entail any bad Karma for the person, for it is sanc- tioned by the scriptures.

ta: farratatse7 1) 2& tl

ta: faa-aiit Connection with one who performs  the act of generation Wa then.

26. Then (the soul gets) connected with him who performs the act of genera- tion.

‘For whoever eats food and performs the act of generation, (the soul) becomes one with him”’ (Chh. 5. 10. 6). Here the soul’s becoming!iterally

identical with the person is impossible, and we have to understand that it gets connected with him. This further proves that the soul’s becoming plants etc. in the immediately preceding stages is also mere connection with them and not actual birth as such.

ma: saz tl 29 I

at: From the womb wata body.

27. From the womb a (new) body (results).

Finally the actual birth of the soul is referred to in this Sutra. Till now it was only a connection with the successive stages, but now through its con- nection with a person performing the act of generation the. soul enters the woman and there gets a new body fit for experiencing the results of its past residual Karma.

CHAPTER ITI

[Section II]

In the last section the passage of the soul to different spheres and its return have been explained. There are people who get disgusted with. Karma or sacrifices leading to such a fate of the soul and become dispassionate. In order to make them grasp the true import of the Mahavakyas or the great Vedic dicta, this section sets itself to elucidate the true nature of ‘That’ and ‘you’ contained in the Mahavakya, “That you art.’’ In the last section the waking state of the soul (the ‘you’) has been fully described. Now its dream state is taken up for discussion, to show that the soul is self-luminous. In this way the three states of the soul, viz. waking, dream, and deep sleep, will be shown to be merely illusory, and thus the consequent identity of the Jiva and Brahman will be established.

aut afecre fe i & tl

dw In the intermediate stage (between waking and deep sleep, i.e in the dream state) @fe: ( there is real) creation “1 (Sruti) says so f¥ because.

1. In the intermediate stage (be-

tween waking and deep sleep, there is a real) creation, because. (the Sruti) says so.

The question is raised whether the creation which one experiences in the dream state is as real as this world of ours, or merely Maya, false, as compared with this waking world. This Sutra, which gives the view of the opponent, holds that it is just as real, for the Sruti declares, ‘‘There are no chariots, nor horses to be yoked to them, nor roads there, but he himself creates the chariots, horses, and roads. For he is the agent’’ (Brih. 4. 8. 10). Moreover, we do not find any difference between the experience of the waking state and that of the dream state. A meal taken in dream has the effect of giving satisfaction even as in the waking state. Therefore the creation of the dream state is real and springs from the Lord Himself, even as He creates ether etc.

farient AH, TATZAAT 1h 2 tl

fasta Creator 4 and w& some (the followers of particular Sakhas of the Vedas) yatea: sons etc. 4 and.

2. And some (Sakh4s or recensions) (state the Self or the Supreme Lord to be) the creator (of objects of desires while we are asleep) and (objects of desires there stand for) sons etc.

A further argument is: given by the opponent that the creation even in dreams is by the Lord

3.2.3] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 311

Himself. ‘‘He who is awake in us shaping objects of desire while we are asleep... that is Brahman’’ (Kath. 2. 5. 8). Sons cte. are the objects of desire that He creates. So, as in the case of the waking state, even in dreams the Lord Himself creates, and hence the world of dreams is also real. There- fore the dream world is not false but real like this Vyavaharika (phenomenal) world of ours.

AAAS J, HicSTaTAASTMaARICATT It 3

ararara’ Mere illusion 9 but aaa in toto vafaermaayeata on account of its nature not being manifest.

8. But (the dream world is) mere illusion, on account of its nature not being manifest with the totality (of attributes of the waking state).

‘But’ discards the view expressed by the two previous Sutras. The nature of the dream world does not agree in toto with that of the waking world with respect to time, place, cause, and non-contradic- tion, and as such that world is not real like the waking world. There can be no appropriate time, place or cause in the dream state. Inside the body, there is not enough space for objects like chariots, horses, etc., and in a dream the soul does not leave the body; for if it did, then one who dreams of having gone to America would: find himself there on waking while he went to sleep in India. Nor is

the midnight proper time for an eclipse of the sun seen in a dream, nor can we conceive a child’s getting children in a dream to be real. Moreover, even in dreams we see objects seen being transformed, as for example, when we see a tree turn into a mountain.

He himself creates the chariots etc.’’ (Brih. 4. 8. 10),

only means that objects which have no reality appear to exist in dreams just as silver does in a mother- of-pearl. The argument that the dream world is real because it is also a creation of the Supreme Lord, like this waking world, is not true, for the dream world is not the creation of the Lord but of the individual soul. ‘‘When he dreams... himself puts the body aside and himself creates (a dream body in its place)’’ (Brih. 4. 8. 9). This text clearly proves that it is the Jiva that creates in dreams and not the Lord.

gaara fe aa: areata a afaza: 2

wa; Omen 4 but fe for Aa: from the Sruti wea say 4 also afez: experts in dream-reading.

4. But (though the dream-world 1s an illusion) yet it serves as an omen, for (so we find) in the Sruti, (and) expert dream-readers also say (thus).

Lest it be thought that because the dream-world is an illusion, even the results indicated by dreams are to be so regarded, this Sutra says that these dreams are yet capable of forecasting events or good

8.2.5] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 313

and bad fortunc. The thing indicated by these dreams is real, though the dreams themselves are unreal, even as the appearance of silver in a mother- of-pear:, though false, produces joy in us, which is real. The Sruti also says so: ‘‘If in this dream he sees a woman, let him know this to be a sign that his sacrifice has succeeded’’ (Chh. 5. 2. 8).

qufasarned fretfzar, aat eer arafaqaat i % tl

qafraaq By meditation on the Supreme Lord q but fadfeaq that which is covered (by ignorance) aa: from Him (the Lord) f¥ fcr Wa of the soul 4- fayaatt bondage and its opposite, i.e. freedum.

5. But by meditation on the Supreme Lord, that which is covered (by ignorance, viz. the similarity of the Lord and soul, becomes manifest); for from Him (the Lord) are its (the soul’s) bondage and freedom.

It has been shown that the dream-world is false. But an objection is raised against it. The individual soul is but a part of the Supreme Soul and therefore shares Its power of knowledge and rulership even as a spark and fire have alike the power of burning. As such it must also be able to create at will like the Lord. This Sutra refutes it and says that that rulership is covered by ignorance in the Jiva state

and gets manifested only when in the state of medita- tion on the Lord this ignorance is destroyed by the knowledge ‘I am Brahman.’ ‘‘When that god is known all fetters fall off.... From meditating on him there arises, on the dissolution of the body, the third state, that of universal Lordship’”’ (Svet. 1. 11). Till then the Jiva cannot create at will anything real. Moreover, this does not come to man spontaneously, since the bondage and freedom of the individual] soul come from the Lord. That is to say, ignorance of His true nature causes bondage, and the knowledge of it results in freedom.

Seater arsfa tt & tl

eeaqiaiaq From its connection with the body ™ and #: that (the covering of its rulership) ‘fq also.

6. And that (the covering of the soul’s rulership) also (results) from its con- nection with the body.

A cause for this covering up of the soul’s ruler- ship is given; and that is its connection with the body etc. Because of these limiting adjuncts, the result of nescience, its knowledge and _ rulership remain hidden, and this lasts so long as it erroneously thinks itself as the body etc. Hence though the soul is not different from the Lord, its powers remain hidden.

3.2.7 | 7 BRAHMA-SUTRAS 815

Now the state of deep sleep or Sushupti is taken up for discussion.

aqarat arety, ray @:, arent a 1 9 ki

aq-wera: Absence of that (dreaming), in other words Sushupti #7sy in the nerves Wala @ and in the Self a@q@: as it is known from the Sruti.

7. The absence of that (dreaming, i.e. dreamless sleep takes place) in the nerves and in the Self, as it is known from the Sruti.

In different texts Sushupti (deep sleep) is said to take place under different conditions. ‘And when a man Is asleep... so that he sees no dreams, then he has entered into those nerves (Nadis)’”’ (Chh. 8. 6. 3); ‘‘Through them he moves forth and rests in the pericardium, i.e. in the region of the heart’? (Brih. 2. 1. 19); ‘When this being full of consciousness is asleep... lies in the ether i.c. the real Self which is in the heart’? (Brih. 2. 1. 17). Now the question arises whether Sushupti takes place in any one of these places, i.e. whether these are to be taken as alter- natives, or whether they are to be taken as standing in mutual relation so as to refer to one place only. The opponent holds that as all the words standing for the places enumerated are in the same case, vis. the locative case, in the texts, they are co-ordinate

and therefore alternatives. If mutual relation was meant, then different case-endings would be used by the Sruti. This Sutra says that they are to be taken as standing in mutual relation denoting the same place.

There is no alternative here, for by allowing option between two Vedic statements we lessen the authority of the Veda, since the adoption of either alternative sublates for the time being the authority of the other alternative. Moreover, the same case is used where things serve different purposes and have to be combined, as, for example, when we say, ‘‘He sleeps in the palace, he sleeps on a couch,” where we have to combine the two locatives into one as ‘‘He sleeps on a couch in the palace.’’ Similarly here the different texts have to be combined, meaning that the soul goes through the nerves to the region of the heart and there rests in Brahman.

It may be questioned why, then, in deep sleep we do not experience the relation of supporter and that which is supported with respect to Brahman and the Jiva. It is because the individual soul covered with ignorance is lost in Brahman even as a pot of water in a lake and so has no separate existence. ‘‘He becomes united with the True, he is gone to his own (Self)’’ (Chh. 6. 8. 1). Moreover, in the following text the three places are mentioned together, ‘In these the person is when sleeping he sees no dreams. Then he becomes one with the

3.2.9] _ BRAAMA-SUTRAS B17

Prana (Brahman) alone’? (Kau. 4. 20). Hence Brahman is the soul’s place of rest in deep sleep.

BAA: TAN SEAT tl < Il wa: Hence Ww: awakening Wanq from this.

8. Hence the awakening from this (..e. Brahman).

‘In the same manner. my son, all these creatures, when they have come pack from the True, know not that they have come back from the True’’ (Chh. 6. 10. 2). In this text the Sruti states that when the Jiva returns after deep sleep to the waking state, it returns from the True or Brahman, thereby showing that in Sushupti Jiva is merged in Brahman and not in the nerves Hita etc. But as it is covered by ignorance it does not realize its identity with Brahman in Sushupti.

a ua q, wataeafa-wegfafire: i & i

gua The selfsame soul 9 but aa-sqafa-se-fafera: on account of Karma, memory, scriptural author- ity, and precept.

9. But the selfsame soul (returns from Brahman after Sushupti) on account of work, memory, scriptural authority, and precept.

A gestion is raised here that just as when a drop

of water has merged in the ocean it is difficult to pick it out again, so also when the Jiva has merged in Brahman it is difficult to say that the selfsame Jiva arises from It after Sushupti. So we have to take that some soul arises after Sushupti from Brahman. There can be no rule that the same soul arises from It. The Sutra refutes this and says that the selfsame soul comes back after Sushupti for the following reasons: (1) What has been partly done by a person before going to sleep, we find him finishing after he wakes up. If it were not the same soul, then the latter would have no interest in finishing what has been partly done by another. (2) From our experience of identity of personality before and after sleep.» (3) From our memory of past events. (4) From script- ural authority as in texts like, ‘‘Whatever these creatures are here, whether a tiger, or a lion, or a wolf, or a boar... that they become again (Chh. G. 9. 8), we find that the selfsame soul returns from Brahman after Sushupti. (5) If the person who goes to sleep and he who rises after it be different, then scriptural precepts either as regards work or knowledge would be meaningless. For if a person can attain identity for ever with Brahman by merely going to sleep, then scriptural instruction would be useless to attain Liberation.

Therefore it is the selfsame soul that rises from Brahman after Sushupti. The case of the drop of water is not quite analogous, for a drop of water merges in the ocean without any adjuncts and so is

8.2.10] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 319

lost for ever; but the Jiva merges in Brahman with its adjuncts. So. the identical Jiva rises again from Brahman owing to its Karma and ignorance, which do not allow it to be lost in Brahman irrevocably.

mastdafe:, aftatard ti fo i ai In a swoon wadufe: partial attainment of

the state of deep sleep aft as the only alter- native left.

10. In a swoon (there is the) partial attainment of the state of deep sleep, as that is the onlv alternative left.

The question of swoon is taken up for discussion. There are only three states of a soul while living in the body—waking, dream, and deep sleep. Its fourth state is death. The condition of swoon cannot come in as a fifth state, as no such state is known. So what is it? Is it a separate state of the soul, or is it but one of these states? It cannot be waking or dream, for there Js no consciousness or experience of anything. It is not deep sleep, for that gives happi- ness, which swoon does not. Nor is it death, for the soul returns to life. So the only alterative left is that in a swoon the soul partially attains the state of deep sleep, inasmuch as there is no consciousness in that state and it returns to life, and partially that of death, as is seen from the soul’s experience of misery and pain in that state resulting in distorted face and limbs.

It is a separate state, though it happens occasionally, and the reason why it is not considered a fifth state is because it is a mixture of the other two states.

Toptc 5: The nature of the Supreme Brahman.

The preceding four topics deal with the nature of ‘you’ or the apparent self. By proving that the creation in dreams is false, it has been shown that though the Jiva appears apparently to enjoy happi- ness and misery, yet in reality it is unattached. By its mergence in Brahman in deep sleep that detach- ment has been firmly established. By saying that the selfsame Jiva returns from sleep the doubt as to its non-permanency has been refuted. By a reference to swoon it has been explained that though all expres- sions of life are extinct in that state still the Jiva is there, and hence one can be sure that even after death the soul continues to exist. Thus it has been shown that the soul is self-luminous, of the nature of consciousness, having pleasure in itself only, and beyond the various states. Having described the nature of ‘you’, the nature of ‘That’ is taken up for discussion in the succeeding Sutras.

a earaansty qveqhrafegy, ats fe nek

a Not waa: from (difference of) place “fa even awe of Brahman saafay twofold characteristic fF because #44 throughout (the scriptures teach other- wise).

8.2.11] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 821

11. Even from (difference of) place a twofold characteristic cannot (be predi- cated) of Brahman, because throughout (the scriptures teach It to be otherwise 7.e. without anv qualities).

In the scriptures we find two kinds of descr'ption about Brahman. Some texts describe It as qualified and some as unqualified. ‘From whom all activities, all desires, all odours, and all tastes proceed’? (Chh. 8. 14. 2) speak of attributes; again “‘It is neither gross nor minute, neither short nor long, neither red- ness nor moisture”’ etc. (Brih. 8. 8. 8). Are we to take that both are true of Brahman according as It is or is not connected with adjuncts, or have we to take only one of them as true and the other as false, and if so, which, and on what grounds? The Sutra says that both cannot be predicated of one and the same Brahman, for it is against experience. One and the same thing cannot have two contradictory natures at the same time. Nor does the mere connection of a thing with another change its nature, even as the redness of a flower reflected in a crystal does not change the nature of the crystal, which is colourless. The imputation of redness is due to ignorance and not real. Neither can a thing change its real nature: it means destruction. Even so in the case of Brah- man, Its corinection with adjuncts like earth etc. is a product of nescience. Hence between the two aspects of Brahman we have to accept that which is attribute-

less as Its true nature, for throughout the scriptures we find Brahman so described to the exclusion of Its qualified aspects. ‘It is without sound, without touch, form, and decay”’ ete. (Kath. 1. 8. 15). The other description of Brahman is only for the sake of Up&sana and is not Its real nature.

a aarfafa Aa, a, cetaaRaATa tl 22 I

a Not so aq on account of difference (being taught in the scriptures) sfa 44 if it be said 4 not so wag with respect to each wag4arq because of the declaration of the opposite of that.

12. If it be said (that it is) not so on account of difference (being taught in the scriptures), (we reply) not so, because with respect to each (such form) the Sruti declares the opposite of that.

We find that the scripture declares Brahman as having different forms in different Vidyas or medita- tions. In some It is described as having four feet, in some as of sixteen digits (Kalas) or again as having for Its body the three worlds and being called Vais- vanara, and so on. So we have to understand on scriptural authority that Brahman is also qualified. This Sutra refutes it and says that every such form due to Upadhi is denied of Brahman in texts like, ‘‘The shining, immortal being who is in this earth, and the shining, immortal, corporeal being in the body

8.2.14] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 828

are but the Self”? (Brih. 2. 5. 1). Such texts show that in all Upachis like earth etc. the same Self is present, and hence there is only non-difference, one- ness. It is not true that the Vedas inculcate the connection of Brahman with various forms. With regard to what we take as different, the Sruti explains at every instance that the form is not true, and that in reality there is only one formless principle.

aGaaqAs tt &3 tl

«aff a Moreover waq thus U% some.

13. Moreover some (teach) thus.

Some Sakh&s (recensions) of the Vedas directly teach that the manifoldness is not true, by passing strictures on those who see difference. ‘‘He goes from death to death, who sees difference, as it were,

ateqaaa fa, acTaTAcaTa I VE Ul

wayaq Formless ua only fe aq-waarm on account of that being the main purport.

14. Verily Brahman is only formless on account of that being the main purport (of all texts about Brahman).

Brahman is only formless for all the texts that aim at teaching Brahman describe It as formless. If Brahman be understood to have a form, then texts ‘which describe It as formless would become purport-

B24 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.2.14

less, and such a contingency with respect to the scrip- tures is unimaginable, for the scriptures throughout have a purport. On the other hand, texts dealing with qualified Brahman seek not to establish It, but rather to enjoin meditations on Brahman. Therefore Brahman is formless.

THATATAIATT HL tl watataq Like light 4 and waqatq not being pur- portless.

15. And like light (taking form in connection with bodies having form, Brahman takes form in connection with Upadhis), because (texts ascribing form to Brahman) are not purportless.

If Brahman is formless, what about the texts which describe It as having form? Are they super- fluous? If Brahman is without form then all Upasanas of the Brahman with form would be futile, for how can the worship of such a false Brahman lead to Brahmaloka and other spheres? This Sutra explains that they are not without a purpose. Just as light, which has no form, appears to be great or small according to the aperture through which it enters a room and yet has the virtue of removing the darkness in the room, even so the formless Brahman appears to have a form, as being limited by adjuncts like earth etc; and the worship of such an illusory Brahman can help one to attain Brahmaloka etc.,

3.2.17} | BRAHMA-SUTRAS 825

which are also illusory from the absolute stantouibe Hence these texts are not altogether purportless. This, however, does not contradict the position already established, viz. that Brahman, though connected with limiting adjuncts, is not dual in character, because the effects of these cannot constitute attributes of a substance, and morcover these limiting adjuncts are all due to Nescience.

ATE A APATITE tt

“1¥ Declares 4 and aq-wlaq that (i-e. intelligence) only.

16. And (the scripture) declares (that Brahman is) that (7.e. intelligence) only.

Now what is the nature of that formless Brah- man? ‘As a lump of salt is without interior or exterior, entire, and purely salt in taste, even so is the Self without interior or exterior, entire, and Pure Intelligence alone’? (Brih. 4. 5. 13). It is mere intelligence, self-effulgent, homogeneous, and without attributes.

axrafa a, set af eaa i 29 tl

ewafa (Scripture) shows 4 also wat thus wf also It (it is) stated by the Smritis. 17. (The scripture) also shows (this, and) thus also (is it) stated by the Smritis.

That Brahman is without any attributes is also

proved by the fact that the Sruti teaches about It by denying all characteristics to It. ‘‘Now therefore the description (of Brahman): ‘Not this, not this.’ Because there is no other and more appropriate description than this ‘Not this’ ’’ (Brih. 2. 8. 6). If Brahman had form, then it would be established by such texts, and there would be no necessity to deny everything and say ‘Not this, not this’. So also the Smritis teach about Brahman: ‘‘The Highest Brahman without either beginning or end, which cannot be said either to be or not to be’’ (Gita 13. 12); “‘It is unmanifest, unthinkable, and without modification, thus is It spoken of” (Gita 2. 25).

aang atqat qrartead tl te

waza Therefore ¥ also 8U4! comparison wWaifeaq like the images of the sun etc.

18. Therefore also (with respect to Brahman we have) comparisons like the images of the sun ete.

That Brahman is formless is further established from the similes used with respect to It. Since this Brahman is mere intelligence, homogeneous, and formless, and everything else is denied in It, there- fore we find that the scriptures explain the fact of Its having forms by saying that they are like reflections in water of the one sun, meaning thereby that these forms are unreal, being due only to limiting adjuncts.

8.2.20] | BRAHMA-SUTRAS. 827

WAIGARU J A TATA tl LE tl wegaq Like water waeaq not being experienced © q but 4 no ameaq similarity.

19. But (there is) no similarity (in the case of Brahman, any second thing) not being experienced like water.

An objection is raised that the comparison of the last Sutra is not correct. In the ease of the sun, which has a form, water, ~which is different and at a distance from it, catches its image; but Brahman is formless and all-pervading, and there can be nothing else different and at a distance from It, to serve as an Upadhi, that can catch Its reflection. So the comparison is defective.

TMAAAAIAAA Aa, TTAB

Za Wl Ro Il

afy-sra-armq Participating in the increase and decrease Wala on account of its being inside wer-aageagq on account of the similarity in the two cases wWaq thus.

20. On account of Brahman being inside (Its adjuncts) (It appears) to partic- ipate in their increase and decrease. On account of: this similarity in the two cases (mentioned -in Sutra 18) it is thus (2e. the comparison is not defective).

The comparison with the reflection of the sun is to be taken not on all fours but only with respect to a particular feature. Just as the reflected sun is distorted, trembles, or varies in size as the water shakes, expands, or contracts, while the real sun remains unchanged; so also Brahman participates, as it were, in the attributes of the Upadhis; it grows with them, decreases with them, suffers with them, and so on, but not in reality. Hence on account of this similarity in the two cases the comparison is not defective.

SMaATSa tl AZ Ul

zurq On account of scriptural instruction 4 and.

21. And on account of scriptural instruction.

The Scripture also teaches that Brahman enters into the body and other limiting adjuncts. ‘‘He made bodies with two feet and bodies with four feet. That Supreme Being first entered the bodies as a bird. He on account of his dwelling in all bodies is called the Purusha” (Brih. 2. 5. 18). Thus also the comparison in Sutra 18 is not defective.

Therefore it is established that Brahman is form- less, of the nature of intelligence, and homogeneous— without any difference.

8.2.22] BHRAHMA-SUTRAS 829

denies the gross and subtle forms of Brahman given in Brih. 2.3.1. and not Brahman Itself.

cHaaaee fe nfatata, aat aatfa a Fa: tl RR Il

waa-garaeqy’, What has been mentioned up to this ufatafa denies a than that ya: something more waifa says Mand.

22. What has been mentioned up to this is denied (by the words ‘Not this, not this’), and (the Sruti) says something more than that (afterwards).

‘‘Brahman has but two forms—gross and subtle, mortal and immortal, limited and unlimited, Sat (defined) and Tyat (undefined)’’ (Brih. 2, 3. 1). Thus describing the two forms of Brahman, the gross, consisting of earth, water, and fire, and the subtle, consisting of air and ether, the Sruti says finally, “‘Now therefore the description (of Brahman): ‘Not this, not this.’ ’’ ete. (Brih. 2. 3. 6). Now the ques- tion is whether the double denial in ‘Not this, not this’ negates both the world and Brahman, or only one of them. The opponent holds that both are denied, and consequently Brahman, which is false, cannot be the substratum for a world, which is also false. In other words, it leads us to Sunyavada, the theory of Void. If one only is denied it is proper that Brahman is denied, for It is not seen and therefore

Its existence is doubtful, and not the world, since we experience it. The Sutra refutes this view and says that what has been described till now, viz. the two forms of Brahman, gross and subtle, is denied by the words ‘Not this, not this,’ the double mention of these words of denial applying to the two forms of Brah- man. The word ‘Iti’ refers to what has been men- tioned immediately before, i.e. the two forms of Brah- man, the subject-matter of the discussion, and there- fore cannot refer to Brahman Itself, which is not the main topic of the preceding texts. Moreover, after denying the world the Sruti says something more than that about Brahman, viz. ‘The Truth of truth’ meaning thereby that Brahman alone is the one reality that exists and is the substratum of the world, which is illusory. Nor is it reasonable to suppose that the Sruti, professing to teach about Brahman, will deny it. It is the Truth of truth, i.e. the reality behind ‘Sat’, or earth, water, and fire, and ‘Tyat’ or air and ether, the definite and indefinite forms in nature. There is no contradiction to perception in this denial of the world, for it denies only the transcendental reality of the world and not its Vyavaharika or phenomenal reality, which remains intact. The objection, viz. that Brahman is not experienced, and therefore it is Brahman that is denied, is baseless; for the object of the Sruti is to teach about something which is not ordinarily experienced by us; otherwise its teaching would be redundant.

3.2.24] 4 BRAHMA-SUTRAS | $31

aqBaeAL, ae fen 2a kt

aq That (Brahman) wey is not manifest we (so the scripture) says fe for.

23. That (Brahmen) is not manifest, for (so the scripture) says.

If Brahman exists, then why is It not perceived? The Sruti says that Brahman is unmanifest on account of our being covered with ignorance. Therefore it is not perceived by us: ‘‘He is not apprehended by the eye, nor by the other senses, nor by penance’’

ag ft ATTA, MIATAATANANTT, Il 2 Il

wfa a And moreover su¥a in perfect meditation (It is experienced) Waa-wAArneATy from the Sruti and Smriti.

24. And moreover (Brahman is ex- perienced) in perfect meditation, (as we know) from the Sruti and Smriti.

If Brahman is not manifest to us, then we can never know It, and therefore there will be no Freedom. This Sutra says that Brahman is not known only to those whose heart is not purified, but those who are purified realize It in the state of Samadhi when ignorance is destroyed. That this is so is known from the Srut) and Smriti: “‘“Some wise man, however, with his eyes turned inside and wishing for immortal- ity saw the Self within’? (Kath. 2. 4. 1); also Mu. 3.

1. 8. The Smriti also says the same thing: ‘‘He who is seen as Light by the Yogins meditating on Him sleeplessly, with suspended breath, contented minds, and subdued senses’’ etc.

THmfsasartated sae Rafer, SVATATS tl VI

ratafeaq Like light etc. @and waite (there is) no difference wam: Brahman ¥# also @#f€ in work wears] on account of repeated mention (in the Sruti). |

25. And as in the case of light etc. there is no difference, (so) also between Brahman (and its manifestation) in activ- ity; on account of the repeated instruc- tion (of the Sruti to that effect).

The nature of the Jiva and Brahman has been described. Now their identity is being explained.

If according to the last Sutra Brahman is the object of meditation and the Jiva is the meditator, it means that there is duality, and not the unity of Brahman. This Sutra explains it. Even as between the sun and its reflection in water etc. there is in reality no difference, the image being unreal, so also the one Brahman manifests as many in the limiting adjuncts of activity like meditation ete. Through ignorance the meditating self thinks it is different from Brahman; but in reality it is identical with

8.2.27] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 888

Brahman. Thet it is so is known from repeated instruction of the Sruti in texts like, ‘That you urt’’, “I am Brahman’’, which deny difference.

aa ciara, aut fe feegsrz 24

we: Therefore Wa%t4 with the Infinite aa thus f¥ for fawa (the scripture) indicates.

26. Therefore (the individuai soul becomes one) with the Infinite; for thus (the scripture) indicates.

The Jiva attains identity with Brahman on the dawning of Knowledge, when ignorance with all its limiting adjuncts disappears. ‘‘He who knows that Supreme Brahman becomes Brahman Itself’? (Mu. 3. 2.9). If the difference were real, then one could not become Brahman Itself. Knowledge may destroy ignorance, but not what is real. Now, since the Jiva becomes Brahman, its individuality was not real, and hence it was destroyed by Knowledge, leaving only Brahman. So the difference is unreal, the identity

real. DITSATAM LA HISTAT tl VO tl

swaayeniq On account of both being taught 4 but “sfegeaaq like that between a serpent and its coils.

27. But on account of both (ie. difference and non-difference) being taught (by the Sruti) (the relation of the Jiva and

Brahman is to be taken) like that between a serpent and its coils.

Having established the identity of the Jiva and Brahman, the author proceeds to elucidate it further by examining the theory of difference and non- difference. In the scriptures we find also texts like, “Two birds of beautiful plumage’”’ etc. (Mu. 3. 1. 1), which speak of difference between the Jiva and Brahman. So we have to understand that the differ- ence between them prior to Liberation is real, though when it is destroyed by Knowledge they attain identity. Hence we have to take that their relation is one of difference and non-difference, as between a serpent and its coils. As a snake it is one but if we look at the coils, hood, etc. there is difference. Similarly between the Jiva and Brahman there is difference as well as non-difference.

ABIMAGIST, AHA I Re Il

yaim-wrygaq Like light and its substratum 7 or a3@iq on account of both being luminous.

28. Or like (the relation of) light and its substratum, on account of both being luminous.

Another example is given to establish the theory of difference and non-difference. The relation between the Jiva and Brahman may be taken to be like that between light and its orb. Both being luminous are non-different; yét on account of their varying extens- ity they are spoken of as different. So is the rela-

3.2.80] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 335

tion between the Jiva and Brahman one of difference and non-differeuce, the one being limited and the other all-pervading.

qaaar tl 28 i

qaaq As before a or.

29. Or (the relation between the two, 1.€. Jiva and Brahtnan) is as given before.

Having given in the two previous Sutras the view of Bhedabhedavadins, the upholders of difference and non-difference, this Sutra refutes it und establish- es as the final truth what has been stated in Sutra 25, viz. that the difference is merely illusory and non- difference is the reality. For if the difference is also real, it can never cease to be, and all the instruction of the Sruti with respect to Liberation will be useless, for bondage is nothing but this idea of separateness, and if this is reai, there can be no Liberation at all. But if the difference is due to ignorance, then Knowl- edge can destroy it and the reality, the non-difference may be realized. So the views given in Sutras 27 and 28, which later on were developed by Kumarila and Bhaskara, are uot correct, and the view given in Sutra 25 alone is correct.

TfATATSA tl Ro | yfatad On account of the denial ¥ and. 39. And on account of the denial.

From the Sruti texts like, ‘‘There is no other wit- ness but He”? (Brih. 8. 7. 28), which deny that there exists any other intelligent being apart from Brahman, and from the denial of the world by, ‘‘Not this, not this’’, it follows that there is no other entity but Brahman. Therefore there is only one Brahman without any difference whatsoever.

expressions which apparently imply something else as existing are only metaphorical.

QUAa: AArATAAATATSTTTANT: U1 BL

qiq Greater Wa: than this (Brahman) &4-e-ma- waeq-Re-ageMy; on account of terms denoting a bank, measure, connection, and difference.

31..(There is something) superior to this (Brahman), on account of terms de- noting a bank, measure, connection, and difference (used with respect to It).

To say that there is nothing except Brahman is objectionable, for we find that there is something besides Brahman on account of Its being designated as a bank separating things other than Itself in texts like, ‘‘That self is a bank, a boundary”’ etc. (Chh. 8. 4. 1); as having size and therefore limited in texts like, ‘“That Brahman has four feet’? (Chh. 8. 18. 2)— it is well known that whatever is limited is limited by some other object; as being connected with other

8.2.33] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 887

objects: ‘The embodied self when embraced by the Supreme Self’? (Brih. 4, 8. 21), which shows that there is something else than Brahman; and as being differ- ent: ‘‘The Atman is to be seen,’’ thereby hinting a seer and seen. All these show that Grahmen is not one without a second.

AATEATS Ui 3 Il 4 But way on account of similarity.

382. But (Brahman is called a bank) on account of similarity.

‘But’ refutes the position taken in the previous Sutra. There can exist nothing different from Brah- man. It is called a bank, not because there exists something beyond It, as in the case of a bank, but on account of a similarity. The similarity is this: Just as @ bank keeps back water and marks the boundary of adjacent fields, even so Brahman maintains the world and its boundaries. ‘‘Having passed the bank’’ (Chh. 8. 4. 2) means, having attained Brahman fully and not having crossed it, even as we say he has passed in Grammar, meaning thereby that he has mastered it.

Gears: Weard il 33 Il gary: For the sake of easy comprehension Wear just like (four) feet.

38. (Brahman is depicted as having

size) for the sake of easy comprehension (1.e. Upasana); just like four feet.

The statements as to the size of Brahman, ‘Brah- man has four feet’, ‘It has sixteen digits’, etc. are meant for the sake of Updsan4é; for it is difficult to comprehend the Infinite, all-pervading Brahman. Just as mind conceived as the personal manifestation of Brahman is imagined to have the organ of speech, nose, eyes, and ears as its four feet, so also Brahman is imagined as having size etc. for the sake of Upasana, but not in reality.

wiafaatara, tHTafza tt ae I

wifi On account of special places yannfzaq like light ete.

34. (The statements about connec- tion and difference with respect to Brah- man) are on account of special places; as in the case of light etc.

The statements regarding difference are made with reference to limiting adjuncts only and not to any difference in Brahman’s nature. We speak of light inside a chamber and light outside it, though in reality light is one, the distinction being due to limiting adjuncts. So also all statements about con- nection are made with reference to the removal of the adjuncts, when connection with the Supreme Self is said to take place metaphorically, even as on the

3.2.86) BRAHMA-SUTRAS | 889

destruction of tle chamber the light inside it may be said to be united with light in general.

SITULA tt Bs Il sqqa; From reasoning 4 and. 35. And it is reasonable.

This Sutra explains further that connection and difference are not to be taken as real, but only meta- phorically. The connection of the Jiva with Brahman - in deep sleep cannot be real. ‘‘It merges in its Self’’ (Chh. 6. 8. 1), shows that the connection of the soul with Brahman is a natural, inherent identity, and not as between two things. Similarly the difference referred to is not real, but due to ignorance, as can be gathered from hundreds of texts.

aaa aTITs tl BE A

aat Similarly wa-ufataiq on account of the express denial of all other things.

36. Similarly on account of the ex- press denial of all other things (there is nothing but Brahman).

A further reason is given to show that there is nothing but Brahman. “The Self is all this’? (Chh. 7. 25. 2); “‘All this is Brahman alone” (Mu. 2. 2. 11) etc. deny the existence of anything else besides Brahman. Therefore Brahman is one without a

second.

Baa AATACTATATARSAT SRA: || 39 1

waq By this #4aaaq all-pervadingness ‘weala- werfea: as is known from scriptural statements ete. regarding (Brahman’s) extent.

37. By this (is established) the all- pervadineness (of Brahman), as is known from scriptural statements etc. regarding _(Brahman’s) extent.

This Sutra explains the all-pervadingness of Brahman, which follows from the fact that It is one without a second. By saying that texts describing Brahman as a bank etc. are not to be taken literally, and by denying all other things, it is proved that Brahman is all-pervading. If they were taken liter- ally, then Brahman would be limited and not all- pervading and consequently not eternal. That Brahman is all-peryading is known from such Sruti texts as, ‘‘He is omnipresent like ether, and eternal’’

HOA, SAGA: i 3¢ tl

waq Fruits of actions Wa: from Him 3am: for that is reasonable.

38. From Him (the Lord) are the fruits of actions; for that is reasonable.

Having described the nature of Brahman, the

3.2.40] BRAHMA-SDTRAS 841

author proceeds now to discuss the view of the Mimamsakas, who say that Karma (work) and not Iswara. gives the fruits of one’s actions. According to there it is useless tc set up an Iswara for this purpose, since Karma itself can give that result at a future time.

This Sutra refutes it and says that from Iswara alone come the fruits cf one’s work. Karma is in- sentient and short-lived, and cannot therefore be expected to bestow the fruits of actions at a future time according to one’s deserts. We do not see any insentient thing bestow fruits on those who worship it. Therefore it is only from the Lord, who is wor- shipped through actions, that their results proceed.

WMAacaTesT || RE Il waa Because the scripture so teaches 4 and.

89. And because the scripture so teaches.

The scripture declares that the fruits of actions come from the Lord. ‘‘That great, birthless Self is the eater of food and the yviver of wealth (the fruit of one’s work)’ (Brih. 4. 4. 24).

wa stafa:, staat || 0 I wa Religious merits afaff; (sage) Jaimini yaa for the same reasons.

40. Jaimini (thinks) for the same reasons (viz. scriptural authority and

B42 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.2.40

reasoning) that religious merit (is what brings about the fruits of actions).

The view of the previous Sutra is being criticized.

The scripture enjoins, ‘‘He who is desirous of the heavenly world is to sacrifice’? (Tandya). Since every scriptural injunction has an object, it is reasonable to think that the sacrifice itself produces the fruit. But it may be objected that since the deed is des- troyed, it cannot produce a result at a future time. This is met by the positing of an Apurva or extra- ordinary principle, which is produced by the Karma before it is destroyed, and through the intervention of which the result is produced in the distant future. Again, if the deed itself did not produce the result, it would be useless to perform it; and moreover it is not reasonable to imagine one cause (the Lord) for a great variety of effects.

qa Ff Wawa, STIS tt Vz

yaq The former (i.e. the Lord) q but 7euTa": Badaréyana @q-u¢mq on account of His being declared to be the cause (of the actions even).

41. But Badardyana (thinks) the former (the Lord, as the bestower of the fruits of actions) on account of His being declared to be the cause (of the actions even).

‘But’ refutes the view of Sutra 40. Both Karma and Apurva are insentient, and as such incapable

8.2.41] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 348

of producing rcsults without the intervention of an intelligent principle. for such a phenomenon is not experienced in the world. No one gets anything by worshipping stocks and stones. So the fruits of actions come only from the Lord, and this is all the more established, as the Lord Himself causes people to act one way or the other; and since the Jiva acts as directed by Him, He Himself is the bestewer of the fruits of his actions according to his deserts. ‘‘He makes him. whom He wishes to lead up from these worlds do a good deed’’ etc. (Kau. 3. 8); “Whichever divine form a devoiee wishes to worship

. and obtains from it the results he desires, as ordained by Me’’ (Gita 7. 21-22). Since the Lord has regard for the merit and demerit of the souls, the objection that a uniform cause is incapable of pro- ducing various effects does not stand.

In the Jast four topics the entity ‘That’ has been explained. Firstly, Brahman has been shown to be formless, self-effulgent, and without difference; secondly, by the denial of manifoldness in It it has been established that It is one without a-second; and lastly, It has been proved to be the giver of the fruits of people’s actions in the relative world. Thus the two entities ‘you’ and ‘That’ have been ex- plained in these two sections.

CHAPTER ITI

[Section III]

In the last section the two entities ‘you’ and ‘That’ of the Vedic dictum (Mahavakya) ‘That you art’ have been explained and shown to be identical. Now the scriptures prescribe various meditations that help to attain this knowledge of identity. It is not possible for the ordinary man to grasp the Infinite. Therefore the scriptures present various symbols of Brahman such as Prana, Akasa, and mind, for the beginner to meditate upon. Sometimes they pre- scribe the cosmic form of Brahman (Vaisvanara) for meditation. These different methods of approaching the infinite Brahman are known as Vidyas_ or Upasanas.

This section discusses these various Vidyas, by means of which the individual soul attains Brahmah. In this connection the question naturally, arises, whether similar Vidyas described differently in differ- ent recensions of the Vedas are one or different, and consequently to be combined into a single meditation or separately gone through. Here it is decided which Vidyas are the same and have to be combined into one, and which Vidydas are different in spite: of cer- tain similarities. The principle that is followed throughout in the interpretation of these Vidyas is

3.8.1] BRAHMA-SUTRAS B45

this: Since Brahman, which is the only reality, is the resulting cognition of all Vidyas, it may be help- ful to combine the particulars of the same Vidya mentioned in different SakhfAs, since they have been found efficacious by the followers ot those Sakhas.

form met with in the scriptures or in different recen- sions of the scriptures are one Vidyd.

aaaarareaay, aearafaarara i 2 tl

wa-gera-naaa Described in the various Vedanta texts Meafe-sfainq on account of non-difference as regards injunction ete. (i. e. connection, form, and name, )

1 (The Upasanas) described in the various Vedanta texts (are not different), on account of the non-difference as regards injunction etc. (i.e. connection, form, and name).

There are Updsanas described variously in differ- ent Vedanta texts. For example, the Upasana of Prina is described in one way in the Brihadaran- yaka Upanishad and in a different way in the Chhandogya. Are such Updsanas, described differ- ently in different Sakhds of the Vedas, different or same? »-The opponent holds that they are different, on account of the difference in form. This Sutra refutes it and says that such meditations are one and

846 _ BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.8.1

the same, on account of the non-difference as regards injunction, connection, name, and form of these in different Sakhas. Just as on account of the injunc- tion in all Sakhas, ‘‘One should perform the Agni- hotra’’ etc. (Mai. 6. 36) the daily Agnihotra sacrifice is one only, and as Jyotishtoma and VaAjapeya sacrifices described in different Sadkhds are one only, so also on account of non-difference as regards injunction such as, ‘‘He who knows the oldest and greatest”? (Brih. 6. 1. 1.) in both the Brihadéranyaka and the Chhandogya Upanishads, the Prana Vidya in all the Sakhas is one and the same. Similarly as regards the fruit or result of the Upasana there is non-difference. ‘‘He who knows it to be such becomes the oldest and greatest’? (Brih. 6. 1. 1). Prana, which is the object of the meditation, is described in both as the oldest and greatest, and both the meditations are named Prana Vidya. There- fore there being non-difference in all respects, the two Vidyas are not different, but one. The same is true of Dahara Vidya, Vaisvinara Upasana, Sdandilya Vidya, etc. described in various Sakhas.

vareafa Aa, a cREaTAAT tt 2 UI

wetq On account of difference 4 not 3fa 4q if it be said 4 not so wrealafg even in the same ( Vidya ).

2. If it be said (that the Vidyds are) not (one) on account of difference (in minor points), (we reply) not so, since

8.8.2] -BRAHMA-SUTRAS B47

even in the same VidyA (there might be such minor differences).

A further objection is raised that since certain differences are seen to exist with respect to the Vidyas described in different Sakhds, they cannot be one. For exataple, in the Brihadaranyaka in the Panchagni Vidya a sixth fire is mentioned as an object of worship: ‘‘The fire becomes his fire’? (Brih. 5. 2. 14); whereas in the Chhandogya we have, ‘‘But he who knows these five fires’? (Chh. 5. 10. 10). There- fore on account of difference in form the two Vidyas cannot be one. This Sutra refutes it and savs that they are one, since even in the same Vidya there may be differences of form. The five fires like heaven etc. mentioned in the Chhandogya are identified in the Brihadaranyaka. Therefore there can be no differ- ence in Vidya. Nor can the presence or absence of a sixth fire create a difference as regards form, for in the same Atiratra sacrifice the Shodasi vessel may or may not be taken. On the other hand, on account of the majority of fires being recognized in both, it is reasonable that we should add the sixth fire to the Vidya in the Chhandogya. The name ‘five fires’ is also no objection against this increase of number, for the number five is not an essential part of the injunction. Moreover, even in the same Sakha and in the same Vidya differences like this are seen in different chapters; yet the Vidya described in these different chapters is taken on all hands as one.

Therefore in spite of these differences in different Sakhas it is reasonable that Vidyas of the same class are one and not different.

warmqrmey auicad fe auras firarasa aqasa afaaa7: tl 3 tl

aienae Of the study of the Vedas amaa as being such f¥ because @aTM? in the Samachara ( a book of that name ) wfwaraq on account of the qualification a and aaaq like that of the ( seven ) oblations ( viz. Saurya etc. ) 4 and afaza: that rule.

8. (The rite of carrying fire on the head is connected) with the study of the Vedas, because in the Samachara (it is described) as being such. And (this also follows) from its being a qualification (for the students of the Atharva Veda), as is the case with the (seven) oblations (viz. Saurya etc.).

A further objection is raised. In the Mundaka Upanishad, which deals with the knowledge of Brah- man, the carrying of fire on the head by the student is mentioned. The opponent holds that on account of this particular ceremony, which obtains among the followers of the Atharva Veda, the Vidya of the Atharvanikas is different from all other Vidyds. The Sutra refutes this saying that the rite of carrying fire on the head is not an attribute of the Vidya, but of

8.8.4] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 349

the study of the Vedas of the Atharvanikas. So it is described in the book SamA&chara, which deals with Vedic observances. From the following text, ‘SA man who has not performed the rite (viz. carrying fire) does not read this’? (Mu. 3. 2. 11) also we find it is connected with the reading or study of the Upa- nishad and not with the Vidya. The rite of. carrying the fire is connected only with the study of that particular Veda and not others, like the seven obla- tions, which are not connected with the fires taught in the other Vedas, bui only with those of the Atharva Veda. So the unity of Vidyds stands in all cases.

aaa 2 2 i enafa Instructs @ also. 4. (The scripture) also instructs thus.

That which all the Vedas declare’ (Kath. 1. 2. 15) shows that the Nirguna Brahman is the one pur- port of all the Vedanta texts. Therefore all Vidyds relating to It must also be one. Thus the meditation on the Saguna Brahman as Vaisvanara, who is represented as extending from heaven to the earth in the Brihadaranyaka, is referred to in the Chhandogya as something well known: ‘But he who worships that Vaisvanara self as extending from heaven to the earth”? (Chh. 5. 18. 1), thereby showing that all Vaisvanara Vidyd4s are one. Thus since the Nirguna or the Saguna Brahman is one and not many, therefore particular Vidyas which relate to

either of them are also one and not many. This also follows from the same hymns and the like enjoined in one place being employed in other places for the sake of Updsana. The same rule applies to other Vidyés also besides the Vaisvanara, and in consequence they are not many, though differently described in different Sakhas.

The unity of Vidyds, having been established, their results are taken up for discussion.

tioned in different places or Sdkhds are to be combined into one meditation.

sqeerc saraarehaaeadtanna Fi 4

aque: Combination wate since there is no difference in the object of meditation fafaiwaq like the subsidiary rites of a main sacrifice #4 4 and in the Upasanas of the same class.

5. And in the Updasanas of the same class (mentioned in different Sakhas) a combination (of all the particulars mentioned in all Sakhas is to be made), since there is no difference in the object of meditation, just as (a combination of) all subsidiary rites of a main sacrifice (mentioned in different Sakhas is made).

From what has been discussed in the previous Sutras it is clear that the Vidyas described in differ-

3.8.6] BRAHMA-SU TRAS 351

ent Sakhias will have to be combined in the Upasané, since their object after all is one. The particulars mentioned in other Sakhas than one’s own are also efficacious, and as such one has to combine all these, even as one does with respect to subsidiary rites like Agnihotra, connected with a main sacrifice, men- tioned in several Sakhés.

matter are sepurate, though im other respects there are similarities.

aerated gearfafa Aq, a, afaaioa ni & tI

wagid There is difference W®iq on account of ( difference in ) texts %fa aq if it be said 4 not so wfazarq on account of non-difference (as regards essentials).

6. If it be said (that the Udgitha Vidya of the Brihadaranyaka and that of the Chhandogya) are different on account of (difference in) texts; (we say) not so, on account of the non-difference (as regards essentials).

This Sutra represents the view of the opponent, who tries to establish that the two Vidyas are one. ‘“‘Then they said to this vital force in the mouth, ‘Chant the Udgitha for us.’ ‘All right’, said the vital force and chanted for them’? (Brih. 1. 3. 7); Then this vital force that is in the mouth—they meditated

B52 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [3.8.6

on the Udgitha ‘Om’ as that vital force’? (Chh. 1. 2. 7). It may be objected that they cannot be one, because of the difference in texts. But this is unacceptable, because there is unity as regards a great many points. (For the similarity see texts in both.) So on the grounds given in Sutra 3. 3. 1, there is unity of Vidyas.

Ta, THCAaTa qdadaecafead | 9

4 a Rather not WawHeq on account of differ- ence in subject-matter vataraifeaq even as ( the meditation on the Udgitha ) as the highest and greatest (Brahman) (is different).

7. Rather (there is) no (unity of Vidyas), on account, of the difference in subject-matter, even as (the meditation on the Udgitha) as the highest and greatest (7.e. Brahman) (is different from the meditation on the Udgitha as abiding in the eye etc.).

This Sutra refutes the former view and estab- lishes that the two Vidyas, in spite of similarity in many points, are different on account of difference in subject-matter. In the Chhandogya only a part of the Udgitha (hymn), the syllable ‘Om’ is meditated upon as Prana: ‘‘Let one meditate on the syllable ‘Om’ (of) the Udgitha’? (Chh. 1. 1. 1). But in the

8.3.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 858

Brihadaranyaka the whole Udgitha hymn is meditated upon as Prana. Vide Brih. 1. 8. 2. On account of this difference in the object of meditation the two Vidyaés cannot be one. The case is similar to the ‘Upasana on Udgitha enjoined in, ‘his is indeed the highest and greatest Udgzitha’” (Chh. 1. 9. 2), which is different from the one enjoined in the Chhandogya 1. 3, where the Udgitha is meditated upon as abiding in the eye and the sun.

aaiaad, any, afer g aaa uc tt

asta; On account of the name (being same) a if aq it sam has already been answered Wee exists 9 but aa that wfq even.

8. If on account of the name (of both Vidyas being the same, it be said that they are one), it has already been answered. But even that (identity of name in Vidyas admitted to be different) exists.

Identity of name is no reason for claiming unity of Vidyas, since the subject-matter differs. This has already been established in the last Sutra. Moreover, it is borne out by the scriptures. For example, the different sacrifices like Agnihotra, Darsapurnamasa, étc., which all occur in Kathaka, are known as athakas; or even the Udgitha Upasanas of Chh. 1. 6 and Chh. 1. 9. 2 are different Vidyas.

Vidya is apt, as ‘Om’ is common to all the Vedas.

ATATA AAAAT tl & il

ani: Because (Om) extends (over the whole of the Vedas) 4 and ea#aq is appropriate.

9. And because (Om) extends (over the whole of the Vedas), (to specialize it by the term ‘Udgitha’) is appropriate.

Since ‘Om’ is common to all the Vedas we have to understand which particular ‘Om’ is to be medita- ted upon. By specifying that the ‘Om’ which is a part of the Udgitha is to be meditated upon, we learn that it is the ‘Om’ of the Sama-Veda. ‘‘Let one meditate on the syllable ‘Om’ (of) the Udgitha”’

aaragiaesraa il 20 I

aateetq On account of non-difference everywhere waa in the other places %@ these qualities (are to be inserted).

10. On account of the non-difference (of the Vidya) everywhere (i.e. in all the texts of the different Sakhas where the Prana Vidya occurs) these qualities (meni- tioned in two of them are to be inserted)

8.8.11] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 855

in the other places (e.g. the Kaushitaki Upanishad).

In the Chhandogya and Brihadaranyaka Upani- shads in the Frana Vidy& we find the qualities of speech etc. as being richest and so on, are ultimately attributed to Prana but not so in the Kaushitaki Upanishad, for instance. The question is whether they are to be inseried in the Kaushitaki also, where they are not mentioned. The Sutra says that they have to be inserted, sirce the Vidya is the same in all the three Upanishads. Attributes of one and the same Vidya have to be combined wherever that Vidya occurs, although they may not be expressly mentioned.

~walities like ‘Bliss’ etc., which describe Its nature, are to be combined into one meditation, and not others.

Baa TAT: WATTS | 22 Il

waaeg: Bliss and other attributes 7HIrMeq of the subject (7. e. Brahman).

11, Bliss and other attributes (which depict the true nature) of the subject (i.e. Brahman) (have to be combined from all places in ‘the meditation on Brahman).

Brahman is described as Bliss, Knowledge, all- pervading, the self of all, true, etc. in different texts

of different Sakhas. All the attributes are not men- tioned in all places. Now the question is whether they have to be combined in the meditation on Brah- man or not. This Sutra says that they have to be combined, since the object of meditation (Brahman) is one and the same in all Sakhas, and therefore the Vidya is one.

frafireecaranrfa:, sqaarcaat fe AZ 22H

frafaxeafe (Qualities like) joy being Its head etc. wuiff: are not to be taken everywhere sqaarquat increase and decrease f because #2 (are possible) in difference.

12. (Qualities like) joy being Its head etc. are not to be taken everywhere, (being subject to increase and decrease and) increase and decrease (are possible only) if there is difference (and not in Brahman in which there is non-difference).

Attributes like joy being Its head etc. mentioned in the Taittiriya Upanishad are not to be taken and combined in other places where the Updsana of Brah- man is enjoined, because the terms ‘joy’, ‘satisfac- tion’, ‘great satisfaction’, ‘bliss’, etc. indicate qualities which have increase and decrease relatively to each other and to other experiencers (Jivas), and therefore can exist only where there is difference. But Brah- man being absolutely without any difference, these attributes cannot constitute Its nature, and as such

3.8.14] - BRAHMA-SUTRAS 857

they are to be confined to the texts prescribing them and not taken in other places.

ZAU CTMATATHAT |] 23 Nl

sat Other attributes q but ATTA on account of identity of purport.

13. But other attributes (like Bliss etc. are to be combined) on account of identity of purport.

Attributes like Bliss, Knowledge, all-pervading, etc., which describe the nature of Brahman are to be combined, for their purport is the one and indivisible, unconditioned Brahman. These attributes are men- tioned with a view to the knowledge of Brahman and not for Mpasana.

ing that the Self is higher than everything else.

AMARA TAAATATATA i WY tt

wreaa For the sake of meditation waa-aTag as there is no use.

14. (Kathaka 1. 3. 10-11 tells about the Self only as the highest) for the sake of meditation, (and not about the relative position of ‘the objects etc.) as there is no use of it.

‘‘Higher than the senses are the objects, higher

than the objects there is the mind... higher than the Self there is nothing, this is the limit, the Supreme Goal’? (Kath. 1. 8. 10-11). The opponent holds that these sentences are separate and not one, as referring to the Atman alone; therefore it is the aim of the Sruti to teach that the objects are superior to the senses, and so on. This Sutra refutes it and says that it is one sentence and means that the Atman is superior to all these. This information is given for the sake of meditation on the Atman, which results in the knowledge of It. The Atman alone is to be known, for the knowledge of It gives Freedom. But the knowledge of the fact that objects are superior to the senses and so on, serves no useful purpose, and as such it is not the aim of the Sruti to teach this.

BAicHAleqres Il &% Il wearer On account of the word ‘Self’? 4 and.

15. And:-on account of the word ‘Self’.

The view established in the last Sutra is confirm- ed by the fact that the subject of the discussion is called the Self. ‘That Self is hidden in all beings and does not shine forth’? (Kath. 1. 3. 12), thereby hinting that the other things are non-Self. But the enumeration of the series is not altogether useless, inasmuch as it helps to turn the mind, which is out- going, gradually towards the Atman, which is hard to realize without deep meditation.

3.8.16] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 359

Supreme Self anid consequently the attributes of the Self given in other places are to be included in this Aitareyaka meditation.

mengetfaftacad, FATTa th UE Ml

wa-zetfa The Supreme Self is meant ataq as in other texts (dealing with creation) SW on account of the subsequent qualification.

16. (In the Aitareva Upanishad 1.1) the Supreme Self is meant, as in other texts (dealing with creation), on account of the subsequent qualification.

‘Verily in the beginning all this was the Self, one only; there was nothing else whatsoever’’ etc. (Ait. 1.1.). Does the word ‘Self’ here refer to the Supreme Self or to Hiranyagarbha? It refers to the Supreme Self, even as the word ‘Self? in other texts dealing with creation refers to It and not to Hiranya- garbha: ‘‘From the Self sprang forth ether”’ (Taitt. 2. 1). Why? SBecause in the subsequent text of the Aiteraya we have, “‘It thought, ‘Shall I send forth worlds?’ It sent forth these worlds”’’ (Ait. 1. 1-2). This qualification, viz. that ‘It thought’ before creation, is applied to Brahman in the primary sense in other Sruti texts. So from this we learn that the Self refers to the Supreme Self and not to Hiranyagarbha.

sreaqarigta Bq, CATA ATATUTT Il 2S Il

waza Because of the context ff 9a if it be said a@a@_it might be so Sauiqalq on account of the definite statement.

17. If it be said that because of the context (the Supreme Self is not meant, but Hiranyagarbha), (we reply that) it is so (i.e. the Supreme Self is meant) on account of the definite statement (that the Atman alone existed at the beginning).

In the Aitareya Upanishad 1. 1 the Self is said to have created the four worlds. But in the Taittiriya and other texts the Self creates ether, water, etc.— the five elements. Now it is well known that crea- tion of the worlds is by Hiranyagarbha with the help of the elements created by the Supreme Self. So the Self in the Aitareya cannot mean the Supreme Self but Hiranyagarbha. The Sutra refutes it and says that on account of the statement, ‘‘Verily in the beginning all this was the Self, one only’? (Ait. 1. 1), which declares that there was one only without a second, it can only refer to the Supreme Self and not to Hira- nyagarbha. Therefore we have to take that the Supreme Self after creating elements as described in other Sakhas created the four worlds.

The object of Sutras 16 and 17 in establishing that the Supreme Self is meant is that the attributes

3.8.18] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 861

of the Supreme Self given in other places are to be combined in the Aitareyaka meditation.

the Prdéna Vidyé, but only thinking the water as the dress of Prana.

IANA I LE Il

alatenrata On account of being a restatement of an act (already enjoined by the Smriti) aqaq what has not been so enjoined elsewhere.

18. On account of (the rinsing of the mouth with water referred to in the Prana Vidya) being a restatement of an act (already enjoined by the Smriti), what has not been so enjoined elsewhere (is here enjoined by the Sruti).

In the Chhandogya 5. 2. 2. and the Brihadaran- yaka 6. 1. 14 we find a reference to the rinsing of the mouth with water before and after a meal, thinking that thereby Prana is dressed. The. question is whether the Sruti enjoins both or only the latter. The Sutra states that since the former, the act of rinsing, is already enjoined on every one by the Smriti, the latter act of thinking the water as the dress of Prana is alone enjoined by the Sruti.

identical or similar have to be combined, for they are one.

SATA TIA, AAATT tl VE Ul

waa In the same Saékha waq (it is) like this 4 also THe on account of non-difference.

19. In the same Sakha also (it is) like this (ze. there is unity of Vidya), on account of the non-difference (cf the object of meditation).

In the Agnirahasya in the Vajasaneyi Sakha there is a Vidya called Sandilya Vidya, in which occurs the passage, ‘‘Let him meditate on the Self which consists of mind’? etc. (Sat. Br. Madhy. 10. 6. 3. 2). Again in the Brihadaranyaka, which belongs to the same Sakha we have, “This Being identified with the mind”’ etc. (Brih. 5. 6. 1). Do these two passages form one Vidya, in which the particulars mentioned in either text are to be combined, or are they different Vidyas? The Sutra says that they are one Vidya, since the object of meditation in both cases is the Self consisting of mind. The rule as regards the combining of particulars of a similar Vidya in the same Sakha is the same as in the case of such Vidyas occurring in different Sakhas. Therefore the Sandilya Vidya is one.

3.3.20] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 363

Supreme Brahmav as abiding in the sun and in the right eye respectively, given in Brih. 5.5.1-2, cannot he combined, as these are two separate Vidyds.

Baeza naaiy | Ro |

data On account of the connection aq like this wa ir. other cases WT also.

20. In other cases also (e.g. in the Vidya of the Satya Brahman) on account of the connection (i.e. the object of the meditation being the Satya Brahman) (we have to combine particulars) like this (2.e. as in the Sandilya Vidya).

This Sutra sets forth the view of the opponent. ‘Satya is Brahman.... That which is Satya is that sun—the being who is in that orb and the being who is in the right eye’’ (Brih. 5. 5. 1-2). This gives the abode of the Satya Brahman with respect to the gods and the body, and two secret names of the Satya Brahman are also taught in connection with these abodes; the former is ‘Ahar’ and the latter ‘Aham’. Now on the analogy of the Sandilya Vidya, since the object of meditation is one, viz. the Satya Brahman, we must combine the particulars. Therefore both the names ‘Ahar’ and ‘Aham’ have to be combined with respect to Satya Brahman.

1 at, Fates 1 22 I

a at Rather not faitnq on account of difference.

21. Rather not (so) on account of the difference (of abode).

This Sutra refutes the view of the previous Sutra. Though the Vidya is one, still owing to difference in abodes the object of meditation becomes different; hence the different names. Therefore these cannot be exchanged or combined.

axtafa i 22 tl exafa (The scripture) declares 4 also.

22. (The scripture) also declares (that).

The scripture distinctly states that the attributes are not to be combined, but kept apart; for it compares the two ‘persons, the person in the sun and in the right eye. If it wanted the particulars to be combined, it would not institute such a comparison.

Randyaniya-khila are not to be taken into considera- tron in other Brahma Vidyds e.g. the Sdndilya Vidyéd, as the former is an independent Vidyd on account of the difference of Brahman’s abode.

aRrfarearceafa Ara: | 23 tl awfa: Supporting (the universe) aenft: pervading

3.3.28] BRA HMA-SUTRAS 865

the sky wfq also  and “a: for the same reason (as in the previous Sutra).

23. For the same reason (as in the previous Sutra) the supporting (of the universe) and pervading of the sky (attri- buted to Brahman in the Randayaniya- khila) also (are not to be included in other Upasanas of Brahman).

In a supplementary text of the Randyaniyas there occurs the passage, ‘““The powers, which were collected together, were preceded by Brahman; the pre-existent Brahman in the beginning pervaded the whole sky.”? Now these two qualities of Brahman are not to be included in other places treating of Brahma Vidya for the same reason as is given in the last Sutra, viz. difference of abode. Moreover, these qualities and those mentioned in other Vidyas like the Sandilya Vidya are of such a nature as to exclude each other, and are not suggestive of each other. The mere fact of certain Vidydas being con- nected with Brahman does not constitute their unity. Brahman, though one, is, on account of its plurality of powers, maditated upon in manifold ways. The conclusion therefore is that the Upasana referred to in this Sutra is an independent Vidya standing by itself.

and the Taittiriya are not One.

quafaarariaa SaCaAATATATT | RY I

qaafaenqa-sa As in the Purusha Vidy4 (of the Chhandogya) Mand satmq of the others wararna not being mentioned (in the Taittiriya).

24. And (since the qualities) as (men- tioned) in the Purusha Vidya (of the Chhandogya) are not mentioned (in that) of the others (2.e. in the Taittiriya) (the two Purusha Vidyas are not one).

In the last Sutra the Vidyds were held to be different as there was no recognition of the funda- mental attribute of the one Vidya in the other. This Sutra cites an example where such a fundamental attribute occurs in both. On this ground the opponent argues that the two Vidyds are one. In the Chhandogya there is a Vidya about man in which he is identified with the sacrifice: ‘‘Man is the sacrifice.”’ In the Taittiriya Aranyaka (10. 64) also occurs a similar Vidya where man is so identified: ‘‘For him who knows thus, the self of the sacrifice is the sacrificer’’ etc. The fundamental attribute referred to is that man is identified with sacrifice in both. This Sutra says that in spite of this, the two Vidyaés are not one, for the details differ. Moreover, the result of the Vidya in the Taittiriya is the attainment of the greatness of

3.8.25] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 867

Brahmzn, while that oi the Chhandogya is long life. Therefore the two VidyAs are separate, and there can be no combination of particulars in the two places.

whole (bedy oj the enemy)’ etc. and sacrifices mentioned at the beginning of certam Upanishads do not form part of the Brahina Vidyd inculcated in the Upanishads.

PATTTATTT tt 2S

aaife Piercing ete. Waeeq pecause they have a different meaning,

25. (Certain Mantras relating to) piercing etc. (are not part of the Vidyas though mentioned near by) because they have a different meaning.

At the beginning of the Upanishad of the Atharvanikas we have, ‘‘Pierce the whole (body of the enemy), pierce his heart’? etc. Similarly at the beginning of other Upanishads of other Sakhas we have Mantras. The question is, whether these Mantras and the sacrifices referred to in the Brahmanas in close proximity to the Upanishads are to be combined with the Vidyds prescribed by these Upanishads. The Sutra says that they are not to be combined, for their meaning is different, inasmuch as they indicate acts of a sacrifice and therefore have no connection with the Vidyaés. The piercing, for

example, is connected with some ceremony to destroy one’s enemy.

texts that the good and evil deeds of a person who has attained Knowledge go to his friends and enemies respectively, is valid for all texts where discarding of good and evil Karma by such a person is mentioned.

gat 9, SIaAMETAICATA, HATEIR:- CHCTATAAT, TSH tl RE

ett Where )only) the discarding (of good and evil) is mentioned § but sq1a4-weTGAIA on account of the word ‘receiviny’ being supplementary (to the word ‘discarding’) au-#~2-afa- sumaaq as in the case of Kusas (sticks for keeping count of hymns) metres, praise, ana recitation aq that smq has been stated (by Jaimini).

26. But where (only) the discarding (of good and evil) is mentioned, (the receiving of this good and evil by others has to be included), on account of this word ‘receiving’ being supplementary (to the word ‘discarding’), as in the case of Kusas, metres, praise, and recitation. That (viz. that it should be so done) has been stated (by Jaimini in Purva Mimamsa).

Having dealt with the combination of particulars

8.8.26] BRAHMA-SUTERAS 869

with respect to similar Vidydés, the author now pro- ceeds to dea] with the combination of the effects with respect to the Upasaka.

Jaimini has said that statements with respect to Kusas, metres, praise, and hymns kave to be com- pleted from other texts. In some places Kusas are simply mentioned, bui another text specifies that they are to be made of fig wood. The first Sruti will have to be completed in the light of the other. Similarly with respect to metres, praise, and recita- tion. This principle is here applied to the effects of the Updsaka’s actions in connection with the Vidyaés mentioned in the Upanishads. We find certain texts mention the discarding of good and evil by a person attaining Knowledge. Vide Chh. 8. 18. Another text not only mentions this, but also adds tha. the good and evil are obtained by his friends and enemies respectively. Vide Kau. 1. 4. This Sutra says that the obtaining of the good and evil by his friends and enemies has to be inserted in the Chhandogya text, according to Jaimini’s principle explained above.

This Sutra muy also be explained in another way if the discussion on ‘discarding’ is different. It may be argued that the verb ‘Dhu’ in the text of the Chhandogya and Kaushitaki may be inter- preted as trembling and not as getting rid of, in which case it would mean that good and evil still cling to a person who attains Knowledge, though their effects are retarded owing to the Knowledge.

This Sutra says that such a meaning is not correct, for the subsequent portion of the text in the Kaushitaki shows that others get this good and evil, and this is not possible unless the person who attains Knowledge discards them.

the knower of Brahman takes place at the time of death and not. on his way to Brahmaloka.

AAU, AMSINATATA, AAT FT I} 29 I

waa At the time of death aaa-wnam there being nothing to be attained aa so also fe for wa others.

27. (He who attains Knowledge gets rid of his good and evil works) at the time of death, there being nothing to be obtain- ed (by him on the way to Brahmaloka through works); for other texts also say SO.

The question is raised as to when the individual soul gets rid of the effects of its good and evil works. ‘“He comes to the river Viraja and crosses it by the mind alone, and there he shakes off good and evil’’ (Kau. 1. 4). On the basis of this text the opponent holds that the effects are got rid of on the way to Brahmaloka and not at the time of death. This Sutra refutes it and says that the man of realization gets rid of them at the time of death. The Sanchita

8.8.28] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 871

and Agimi Karmc (work) is destruyed with Know- ledge and the Prarabdha is destroyed at death. So at the time of death he is rid of all effects of his good and evil deeds. The reasons for this conclu- sion are: On the way to Brunmaloka, the destina- tion of the knower of Brahman, it 1s not possible to discard good and evi: effects for then the soul has no gross body, and so cannot practise any Sadhana that will destroy them. Nor does the soul experience anything on the way, for which one would have to admit the persistence of good and evil till then. Rather they are destroyed by the Vidya practised by the aspirant before he leaves the body. The scripture also says, “Having shaken off his evil as a horse shakes off his hairs’? etc. (Chh. 8. 138. 1). Moreover, it is not possible to cross the river Viraja unless one is free from all good and evil. Therefore we have to tuke it that all the good and evil are discarded at the time of death and the Kaushitaki text has to be explained accordingly.

BeIA:, SIATATATA ll Re 1

ea: According to his liking swa-wfattenq on account of there being harmony between the two.

28. (The interpretation that the individual soul practising Sadhana) ac- cording to his liking (gets rid of good and evil while living, is reasonable) on account of there being harmony (in that case)

B72 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.8.28

between the two (viz. cause and effect as well’ as between the Chhandogya and another Sruti).

Since the individual soul attains Brahman after death as a result of the Vidy4, why not understand that the getting rid of good and evil, the result of the Vidya, is also attained after death? Not so, for it is possible to practise Sadhana to one’s liking only during one’s life time, and from Sadhana alone results the destruction of good and evil. And it is not reasonable to say that the cause being there, the effect is delayed till some time after death. Therefore there is harmony between the texts quoted above. The attainment of Brahmaloka is not pos- sible so long as there is a body, but there is no such difficulty about the shaking off of good and evil.

‘Topic 17: The knower of the Saguna Brahman alone goes by the: path of the gods after death and not the knower of the Nirguna Brahman.

TaCTTayAaar, Berar fe fachs: Ve

aa: Of the soul’s journey (after death) along the path of the gods waaea utility seratin two ways sal otherwise fe for fata: a contradiction.

29. (The soul’s) journey along the path of the gods is applicable in two ways (i.e. differently), for otherwise (there would result) a contradiction.

8.8.30] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 378

A question is raised that just as the getting rid of good and evil is understocd as being followed by their acceptance by others, so also the journey after death alcag the Devayana, the path of the gods, which is sometimes mentioned as foliowing the dis- carding of good and evil, is common to all Upasakas, those of the Nirguna as well as the Saguna Brahman. This Sutra says that it is true only of the worshipper of the Saguna Brahman, for Brahmaloka being located elsewhere in space, the journey has a mean- ing in his case only. But the knowledge which results from absorption in the Nirguna Brahman is merely the destruction of ignorance. So what meaning has journey for such a person. If the journey applies to him also, chen it would contradict Sruti texts like, ‘‘Shaking off good and evil, free from passions. he reaches the Highest Unity’? (Mu. 3. 1. 3). How can one who has become Brahman, the pure, the one without movement, go to another place by Devayana. Since he has already attained his goal, viz. unity, the journey along the Devayana is meaningless for him. Therefore the worshipper of the Saguna Brahman alone goes by the Devayana.

SATH:, AMAIIAGsea:, SHAT |) 30 I suua: Is reasonable aq-aawy-sqeea; for the char- acteristics which render such Journey possible are seen @#aq as iii Lhe world. 30. (The differentiation mentioned above) is reasonable, for the characteristics

which render such a journey possible are seen (in the case of Saguna Updasana but not in that of Nirguna Updasané4); as (is seen) in the world.

The differentiation between the paths of the worshippers of the Saguna and Nirguna Brahman is reasonable, because the characteristics or reasons for such a journey of the worshipper of the Saguna Brahman, are seen in the Vidy& described in the Kaushitaki Upanishad. For the texts mention certain results which can be attained by the wor- shipper only by going to different places, such as mounting the couch and holding conversation with Brahman. But with perfect Knowledge or destruc- tion of ignorance, which results from Nirguna Upasana, no purpose is served by such a journey. The distinction is analogous to what is seen in the world. To reach a village we have to go by the path which leads to it. But no such journey is required to get rid of our illness.

Brahman go after death by the path of the gods to Brahmaloka, and not merely those who know the Panchégni Vidyd etc., wherein such a path is specifically mentioned.

afraa: aatany, afacta: seqrgarar- FATT WA tl

wfaaa: (There is) no restriction wale (Devayana

8.3.81] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 875

applies equally) to ali (Vidyas of the Saguna Brah- man) wfatu: there is non-contradiction We-WqATreaTy as is seen from the Sruti and Smriti.

31. (The passage of the soul by the path of the gods) is not restricted (only to certain Vidyds of the Saguna Brahman); (it applies equally) to all (Vidyas of the Saguna Brahmant. There is no contra- diction, as is seen from the Sruti and Smriti.

In the Panchagni Vidya of the Chhandogya the result of such a meditation is said to be the passage after death to Brahmaloka by the path of the gods (Devayana). But such a result is not explicitly stated in the case of the Vaisvanara Vidya. The question is whether through this Vidya also one goes after death along the Devaydna or not. This Sutra says that all worshippers of the Saguna Brahman, whatever their Vidyds, go after death by this path. For so it is seen from the Sruti and Smriti. “Those who meditate thus (through Panchagni Vidyé) and also those who meditate in the forest endowed with Sraddhé and Tapas go by the path of the gods’ (Chh. 5. 10. 1). This text clearly shows that those who meditate upon these five fires, and those dwellers in the forest who, endowed with faith and austerity, worship the Saguna Brahman through any other Vidya, both go by the

path of the gods. For the support of this view by the Smriti see Gité 8. 26.

fulfilment of some divine mission.

arazfaanraaferfacifaanrtanray | 32 tl

araq-afraitq So long as the mission is not fulfilled wafefa: (there is corporeal) existence wfwafiarang of those who have a mission to fulfil.

32. Of those who have a mission to fulfil (there is corporeal) existence, so long as the mission is not fulfilled.

Rishi Apantaratama was born again as VyAsa. Sanatkumara was born as Skanda. So also other Rishis like Vasishtha and Narada were born again. Now these Rishis had attained the knowledge of Brahman, and yet they had to be reborn. If that is so, what is the utility of such knowledge of Brahman?—says the opponent. This Sutra refutes it and says that ordinarily a person after attaining Knowledge is not reborn. But the case of those who have a divine mission to fulfil is different. Those perfected sages have one or more births until their mission is fulfilled, after which they are not born again. But then they never come under the sway of ignorance although they may be reborn. Their case is analogous to that of a Jivanmukta, who even after attaining Knowledge continues his corpo-

8.8.33]. BRAHMA-SUTRAS — «8TT

real existence as long as the Prarabdha Karma lasts.

The divine mission of these people is comparable to the Praérabdha Karma.

mentioned in various texts ure to be combined in all meditations on Brahman.

seatfaat cqacha:, arareTagiarearaqagad, ASH ll BE tl

wafwar Of the conceptions of the (negative) attributes of the Immutable (Brahman) ¢ but wad: combination S1Wlaxiarea on account of the similar- ity (of defining Brahman through denials) and the object (viz. Immutable Brahman) being the same 3qaeaq as in the case of the Upasad (offerings) aq it wHq has been said (by Jaimini).

83. But the conceptions of the (nega- tive) attributes of the Immutable (Brah- man) are to be combined (from different texts where the Immutable Brahman is treated, in all meditations on the Immut- able Brahman, as they form one Vidy4), on account of the similarity (of defining the Immutable Brahman through denials) and the object (the Immutable Brahman) being the ‘same, as in the case of the Upasad (offerings). It has been said (by Jaimini in Purva Mimamsa).

‘O GAargi, the knowers of Brahman say this Immutable (Brahman) is that. It is neither gross nor minute, neither short nor long’? etc. (Brih. 3. 8. 8). Again we have, ‘‘The supreme knowledge is that by which the Immutable (Brahman) is attained. That which is imperceivable, ungraspable’’ etc. (Mu. 1. 1. 5-6). The question is whether the negative attributes in these two texts are to be combined so as to form one Vidya, or they are to be treated as two separate Vidyds. The opponent holds that these attributes do not directly specify the nature of Brahman like the positive attributes, bliss, truth, etc., and so the principle established in Sutra 8. 8. 11 does not apply here, for no purpose is served by such a combination. So each denial is valid only for the text in which it occurs and not for other places. This the Sutra refutes and says that such denials are to be combined, for the method of teaching Brahman through denial is the same, and the object of instruction is also the same, viz. the Immutable Brahman. The rule of Sutra 8. 3. 11 applies here also, though there we were concerned with positive attributes and here with negative attributes which teach Brahman by an_ indirect method. The case is analogous to the Upasad offerings. The Mantras for giving these offerings are found only in the Sama-Veda. But the priests of the Yajur-Veda use this Mantra given in the other Veda. This principle is decided by Jaimini in Purva Mimaémsa. Similarly here also in the meditation on

8.8.84] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 379

the Immutable (Brahman) the negative attributes have to be comhined..

form one Vidya.

TAATAAATS tl 32 I

wea-warne On account of describing as this much.

34. Because (the same thing) is de- scribed as such and such.

‘Two birds of beautifu) plumage... one of them eats the sweet and bitter fruits thereof, the other witnesses without eating’? (Mu. 8.1.1). Again we have, ‘There are the two... enjoying the results of their good deeds’? etc. (Kath. 1. 3. 1). In these two texts do we have two different Vidyas, or one only? The opponent holds that these are two Vidyas, for unlike the meditation on the Immutable, where the object of meditation was one, as shown in the previous Sutra, here there are different objects of meditation. That it is so is clear, for of the texts cited above, the Mundaka text says only one eats the fruit, while the other does not; in Katha, however, both of them enjoy the results of their good actions. So the object of meditation is not identical. The Sutra refutes it and says that they form one Vidya, for both describe the same Lord as existing thus and thus, t.e. in the form of the Jiva. In other words, the object of the two texts

is to teach about the Supreme Brahman and show the identity of the Jiva and Brahman. It has been explained in 1. 2, 11 that the Supreme Lord does not actually enjoy the fruits of actions, but is said to do so because of His being mentioned along with the Jiva, which does, as when we say, ‘The men with the umbrella’, where only one of them has the umbrella. Therefore the object of the medita- tion being one, the Vidyas are also one.

constitute one Vidya.

AAT YAATAAT AICHA: | A Il

wat As being innermost of all yauaq as in the case of the elements @twa: ( teaching) of the same Self.

385. The same Self (is taught) as being the innermost of all, as in the case of the elements.

In the Brihadaranyaka we find Ushasta question- ing Yajnavalkya thus: ‘‘Explain to me the Brahman that is immediate and direct—the self that is within all’?; and Yajnavalkya replies: ‘‘That which breathes through Prana is your self, that is within all’’ (Brih, 3. 4. 1). In the same Upanishad 8. 5. 1, to the same question put by Kahola, Yajnavalkya replies: ‘That which transcends hunger and thirst, grief and delusion, decay and death. Knowing this very Self’’ etc. The opponent holds that these two are separate

8.8.36] BRAHMA-SUTRAS B81

Vidyais, because the answers given being different, the objects referred to must be different. The Sutra refutes this and says that the object is one, the Supreme Self, for it is impossible to conceive two Selves being simultaneously innermost of all in the same hody, even as none of the five elements constituting the body can be the innermost of all in the true sense of the term, though relatively one element can be inside another. Similarly one Self alone can be the innermost of all. Therefore the same Self is taught in both the answers.

seqar dargaafafefa Aa, 7, Jasx- rata | 36 tl

wag! Otherwise #2-4qaTIa: the repetition cannot be accounted for 3f@ 3a if it be said 4 not so sqewi- waq like another instruction (in the Chhandogva).

36. If it be said (that the two Vidyas are separate, for) otherwise the repetition cannot be accounted for, (we say) not so; (it is) like (the repetition) in another instruction (in the Chhandogya).

An objection is raised that unless the two texts refer to two different Selves, the repetition of the same subject would be meaningless. This Sutra says that it is not like that. The repetition has a significance. It is intended to make the student understand the subject more convincingly from different angles, and so the repetition does not

justify us to take that two different Selves are taught here, even as the repetition of the teaching ‘You art That’ nine times does not entitle us to take the whole teaching in the Chhandogya as more than one Vidyé. The difference in answer is due to the fact that the second answer tells something special about the Self. In the first it is taught that the Self is different from the body; in the second, that It is beyond relative attributes.

in Ait. Ar. 2. 2. 4. 6 and not merely one way.

safaerc:, fafriata razaa ti 309 It

safest: Reciprocity (of meditations) fafstafa (the scriptures) prescribe (this) fe for xavaq as in other cases.

37. (There is) reciprocity (of medita- tion), for the: scriptures prescribe this, as in other cases.

In the Aitareya Aranyaka we have, ‘‘What I am, that He is; what He is, that am I”’ (2. 2. 4. 6). The question here is whether the meditation is to be of a reciprocal nature, i.e. identifying the wor- shipper with the being in the sun, and then, inversely, identifying the being in the sun with the worshipper; or only in the first named way. The opponent holds that the meditation is to be one way only and not in the reverse way also. For the first meditation has @ meaning, inasmuch as it raises the Jiva to the

8.3.88] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 883

level of Brahman, but lowering Brahman to the Jiva state is meaningless. The present Sutra refutes this view and says that the meditation is to be both ways, for otherwise such a statement would be useless. Sruti expressly prescribes the reverse meditation, even as it prescribes elsewhere that the Lord is to be meditatcd upon as having true determination (Satya Sankalpa) and so on. This is not lowering Brahman, since He who has no body can be worshipped even as possessing a form.

treat of one Vidyd about Satya Brahman.

aa fe GeaNeA: |) 3¢ tl

a ua The same (Satya-Vidy&) fe because aanea: (attributes like) Satya ete.

88. The same (Satya-Vidya is taught in both places), because (attributes like) Satya etc. (are seen in both places).

In the Brihadaranyaka 5. 4. 1 we have, ‘‘He who knows this great, adorable, first born (being) as the Satya Brahman, conquers these worlds.’’ Again in 5. 5. 2 we have, That which is Satya is that sun— the being who is in that orb and the being who is in the right eye... he destroys evils.’’ Are these two Satya-Vidyas one or different? The Sutra says that they are one, inasmuch as the second text refers to the Satya of the earlier text by saying, “‘That which is Satya’’ etc. But it may be said that the result of

‘384 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.8.88

these two meditations is different, as is seen from the texts: In the first it is said that such a person conquers these worlds, and in the second, that he: destroys evils. In reality, however, there is only one result. in both cases, and the mention of result in the latter case is merely by way of praise of the further instruction given about Satya.

and Brih. 4. 4. 22 are to be combined on account of a number of common features in both the teats.

TATA ATA AA A, sraaratfees: I Ae tt

araife (True) desire ete. ‘ata in the other aa (those mentioned) in the other 4and waaafes: on account of the abode etc.

39. (Qualities like true) desire etc. (mentioned in the Chhandogya are to be inserted) in the other (2.e. in the Brihad- aranyaka) and (those mentioned) in the other (i.e. in the Brihadaranyaka are also to be inserted in the Chhandogya), on account of the abode etc. (being the same in both).

In the Chhandopya 8. 1. 1 we have, ‘“There is the city of Brahman and in it the palace-like lotus and in that the small ether... That is the Self?’ ete. Again in the Brihadaranyaka 4. 4. 22 we have, ‘“‘That

3.8.40] BRAHMA-SUTRAS “885

great birthless Self which is identified with the intellect... fies‘ in the ether that is within the fteart.”’ The question is whether the two constitute one Vidya and hence the particulars are to be com- bined, or not. The Sutra says that they form one Vidya, and the qualities mentioned ii each are to be combined in the cther, ior many points are common to both. There is the seme abode, the same Lord is the object of meditation, and sc on. There is, how- ever, one difference between the two texts. The Chhandogya treats of the Saguna Brahman while the Brihadéranyaka treats of the Nirguna Brahman. But then as the Saguna Brahman is in reality one with the Nirguna, this Sutra prescribes combination of qualities for glorifying Brahman, and not for the purpose of Upasana.

on days of fast.

BTALTITSIT: | Bo Ul wiettq On account of the respect shown Wet: there can be no omission.

40. On account of the respect shown (to the Pranagnihotra by the Sruti) there can be no omission (of this act).

This Sutra’ gives the view of the opponent. In the Vaisvénara Vidya of the Chhandogya the Upasaka, before he takes his meals is asked first to

offer food to each of the Pranas, saying, ‘‘To Prana I offer this.”” The Sruti attaches such importance to this Prandgnihotra that it enjoins food to be offered to the Pranas even before entertaining guests, whom all Hindus are supposed to attend before they take any food. The question is whether this Prandgnihotra is to be observed even on days of fasting. This Sutra says that there should be no omission of it, and so it must be observed even on fast days by sipping at least a few drops of water. since the Sruti attaches such importance to it.

sqfeaasa:, agaara | 32 I

sufera When food is served Wa: from that qa- ama for so (the Sruti) declares.

41. When food is served, from that (the Pranagnihotra is to be performed), for so (the Sruti) declares.

This refutes the view expressed in the last Sutra and says that the Pranagnihotra need not be perform- ed on fasting days, for the Sruti says, ‘Therefore the first food which comes is meant for Homa. And he who offers that first oblation should offer it to Prana, saying Svaha’’ (Chh. 5. 19. 1). The importance given by the Sruti is only to the effect that the first portion of the food, on those days when it is taken, should be offered to the Pranas, and not that it should be observed even on fasting days

8.8.42] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 887

certain sacrifices are not parts of them and hence are not inseparably connected with them.

afaarconrfiarn:, agz8:, Qareanfaaea:

RAL BR

aq-faatia-ufaya; No rule about the inviolability of that aq-ze2: that being secn (from the Sruti) ya separate fe for aafaaa: non-ubstruction Faq result.

42. There is no rule about the inviola- bility of that (2c. Upasanas connected with certain sacrifices); that is seen (from the Sruti itself); for a separate effect (belongs to the Updasanas), viz. non-ob- struction (of the results of the sacrifice).

The question whether certain Updsanas mention- ed with some sacrifices are part of those sacrifices and therefore inseparably connected with them, is taken up for discussion. This Sutra says that such Upasands do not form a part of the sacrifice, for there is no rule as to their inseparability. On the other hand the scripture clearly says that the sacrifice can be performed with or without them. ‘‘Therefore both he who knows this, and he who does not, per- form the sacrifice’? (Chh. 1. 1. 10). See also Chh. 1. 10. 9. The Sruti, moreover, mentions a separate effect of the Upasanas apart from that of the sacrifice, viz. the non-obstruction (i.e. enhancement) of the results of the sacrifice. ‘‘The sacrifice which a man

888 - BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.8.42

performs with knowledge etc. is more powerful’? (Chh. 1. 1. 10). It means that the original sacrifice would have got its own results, but the Upasana enhances those results. So the results of the sacrifice with or without the Updsan4 are different. There- fore the Upasana does not form part of the sacrifice, and hence may or may not be performed according to the pleasure of the sacrificer. Non-obstruction may be explained thus: The sacrifice without the Upasana would have had the prescribed results, but the Updsana prevents any obstruction to those results. This, however, does not make it a part of the sacri- fice. Sometimes the results of the sacrifice are delayed owing to the intervention of any bad Karma of the sacrificer, but the Upasana destroys the effect of that, and the results are attained earlier. Here, however, the sacrifice does not depend upon the Upasané for its results, though they might have been delayed. Hence the Updsan4 is not a part of the sacrifice, and is:therefore optional.

to be kept separate in spite of the essential oneness of

these two. TaAIza, ATH || V3 tl

yetaq As in the case of the offerings ¥ exactly aq that yaiq has been stated.

43. (The meditations on Vayu and Prana are different owing to their different

3.8.44], BRAHMA-SUTRAS: 889

functions, though the two are essentially one); (it is) exactly as in the case of the offerings (of cakes to Indra the ruler, the monarch, and the sovereign separately). This has been stated (by Jaimini in Purva Mimamsa-Sutras).

In the Samvarga Vidy4 of the Chhandogya, medi- tation on Prana with reference to the body and on Vayu with reference to the gods is prescribed. Now many texts declare that Prana and Vayu are one in essence. So the opponent holds that the two medi- tations can be combined. The Sutra refutes the view and says that they are to be kept apart, in spite of the non-difference in naturc of Vayu and Prana; for their functions due to their different abodes are differ- ent. Just as oblations are separately given to Indra the ruler, the monarch, and the sovereign according to his different capacities, though he is one god; so the meditations on Vayu and Prana have to be kept apart. This principle is established by Jaimini in Purva Mimamsa.

Brihadéranyaka are not part of the sacrificial act, but constitute a separate Vidyd.

fegyaean, ate aera: cats tl ve tl faye ‘On account of the abundance of indicatory marks 4 it (an indicatory mark) fe for aga: is stronger aq that “fq also.

44. On account of the abundance of indicatory marks (the fires of the mind, speech, etc. in the Agnirahasya of the Vajasaneyins do not form part of the sacrifice), for it (an indicatory mark) is stronger (than the context). That also (has been stated by Jaimini).

In Agnirahasya of the Satapatha Brahmana certain fires, named after mind, speech, eyes, etc. are mentioned. The question is whether these form part of the sacrifice mentioned therein, or form an independent Vidya. The Sutra says that in spite of the prima facie view which arises from the context, these constitute an independent Vidya. For there are many indicatory marks to show that these fires form a Vidya; and indicatory marks are more forceful than the context, according to Purva Mimamsa.

qafraad: caroicearicaat, ATAATT Nl V4 I

ya-faxag: Alternative forms of the one mentioned first VATA on account of the context Ba ought to be faa! part of the sacrifice am#aq like the imaginary drink.

45. (The fires spoken of in the pre- vious Sutra are) alternative forms of the one mentioned first (7.e. the actual sacri- ficial fire) on account of the context;

3.8.4.7] BR AHMA-SUTRAS 391

(they) ought to be part of the sacrifice like the imayvinary drink.

Lhe opponent raises a fresh objection. In a certain sacrifice a Soma drink is offered to Prajapati, wherein the earth is regurded as the cup and the sea as the Soma. This is a mental act only, and yet it forms a part of the sacrifice. So these fires also, though mental, i.c. imaginary, are yet part of the sacrifice, and not an independent Vidya, because of the context. They are rather un alternative form of the first-mentioned actual tire.

afazara i ve il

wfaemiq On account of tne extension (of the attributes of the first to these fires) @ and.

46. And on account of the extension (of the attributes of the actual fire to these imaginary fires).

The opponent gives a further reason In support of his view. The Sruti in that passage attributes all the qualities of the actual fire to these imaginary fires. Hence they are part of the sacrifice.

faaa a, frarcona 1 ve i fact Vidya va indeed @ but fautvaq because (the Sruti) asserts it.

47. But (the fires) rather form a Vidya, because (the Sruti) asserts it.

‘But’ refutes the opponent. "The Sutra says that the fires constitute a Vidya, for the text asserts that ‘“‘They are made of knowledge only,’’ and that “‘By knowledge and meditation they are made for him.”’

TATSS | BC I zur Because (of the indicatory marks) seen 4

and. 48. And because (of the indicatory marks) seen.

The indicatory marks are those referred to in Sutra 44.

AAA AAA TINA: | BE I

qufe-aataca Because of the greater force of the Sruti ete. (i.e. indicatory mark and syntactical connection) 4 and 4 4: cannot be refuted.

49. And hecause of the greater force of the Sruti et¢. (2.e. indicatory mark and syntactical connection), (the view that the fires constitute a Vidy4) cannot be refuted.

The Sruti directly says, ‘‘All these fires are kindled with knowledge alone.’”? The indicatory mark is this: ‘All beings kindle these fires for him, even when he is asleep.’? This continuity of the fires indicates that they are mental ones. An actual sacrifice is not continued during sleep. The syntacti- cal connection is: ‘‘Through meditation alone are

8.8.50] BR AHMA-SUTRAS 898

these fires of the worshipper kindled.’? These three are more forcible fhan mere context.

ATIVAN AA: MIUPATPATAAT, FLA, ASH tl ‘20 Il waaay: From the connection and soon (exten- sion etc.) Waiet-gymar even as other Vidyas are separate €e: (it is) seen 4 and aqy-sHA this has been said (by Jaimin1).

50. From the connection and so on (extension etc.) (the fires constitute a separate Vidya), even as other Vidyas (like the Sandilya Vidya) are separate. And (it is) seen (that in spite of the con- text a sacrifice is treated as independent). This has been said (by Jaimini in Purva Mimamsa-Sutras).

This Sutra gives additional reasons in support of the view set forth in Sutra 47. The text connects for purposes of Sampad Upasané (meditations based on resemblance) parts of a sacrifice with mental activities, e.g. “‘These fires are started mentally, the altars are set up mentally... everything connected with this sacrifice are done mentally.’’ This is possi- ble only if there is a sharp difference between things resembling each other.

The fires form a separate Vidya, even as the Sandilya Vidy4, Dahara Vidya, etc. form separate

Vidyds, although mentioned along with sacrificial acts. Moreover, it is seen in the sacrificial portion of the Vedas the sacrifice Aveshti, though mentioned along with the Rajasuya sacrifice, is yet regarded as an independent sacrifice by Jaimini in his Purva Mimaémsé-Sutras.

a arararafy, sqaes:, Heyad, afe atarate: th &&

a Not warnq-sig in spite of the resemblance suas: for it is seen #@aq_as in the case of death afe wtatfa: for the world does not become (fire because of certain resemblances).

51. In spite of the resemblance (of the fires to the imaginary drink, they do) not (form part of the sacrificial act), for it is seen (from the reasons adduced that they constitute an independent VidyaA); (the mental affair here is) as in the case of death, for the world does not become (fire because of certain resemblances).

This Sutra refutes the argument of the opponent given in Sutra 45. The resemblance cited by the opponent there cannot stand, for on account of the reasons already adduced, viz. the Sruti, indicatory mark, etc., the fires in question subserve the purpose of man only, and not any sacrifice. Mere resemblance cannot justify the opposite view. Anything can

8.8.52]. BRAHMA-SUTRAS 395

resemble unything in certain respects; still the things wre different. Thé resemblance cited is like the common epithet ‘death’ applied to fire and the being in the sun. ‘‘The being in that orb is death indeed’’ 10). This resemblance cannot make fire and the being in the sun one. Again we have: ‘‘This world is a fire indeed, O Govama, the sun its fuel’’ etc. (Chh. 5. 4. 1). Here from the similarity of fuel and so on the earth does not actually become fire.

qvor a meaeg arfgerg, qaarag- TT WE? Il

y@qy From the subsequent (Brihmana) 4 and mea of the text afm the fact of being such Ware on account of the abundance @ but Wat: connection

52. And from the subsequent (Brah- mana) the fact of the text (under discus- sion) being such (1.e. enjoining a separate Vidya) (is known). But the connection (of the imaginary fires with the actual fire is) on account of the abundance (of the attributes of the latter that are imagined in these fires).

In a subsequent Bradhmana we have, ‘‘By knowl- edge they ascend there where all wishes are attained. Those skilled in works do not go there’? etc. Here Vidya is praised and work depreciated. From this

we find that what has been shown, viz. that the fires form a Vidya, is the injunction of the Sruti. The connection of the fires with the actual fire is not because they form part of the sacrifice, but because many of the attributes of the real fire are imagined in the fires of the Vidya.

_ the body.

Til now the Upasanas have been discussed. But the utility of these Upadsanas depends on the existence of an individual apart from the body who can reap the results of the Upasanas. In the absence of such an individual the Updsanés and even Vedanta teaching become useless. So in this topic the existence of an Atman apart from the body is taken up for discussion.

TH Wet: MAL ATATA ll 43 ll

wa Some (deny) wit: (the existence) of an Atman (besides the body) 4@ (afa) arara_ (for It) exists (only) when there is a body.

58. Some (deny) (the existence) of an Atman (separate from the body), (for It) exists (only) when there is a body.

This Sutra gives the view of the Charvakas or materialists, who deny the existence of an Atman other than the body. They say that man is only a body, having consciousness for its quality, and that

8.3.54] BRAHMA-SUTRAS | 807

consciousness is like the intoxicating property that is produced when certain materials are put together, none of which singly is intoxicating. They arrive at this ccnclusion in this way. Consciousness is seen to exist only when there is a body. Independent of the body it is nowhere experienced. Hence it is only a quality of the body. Therefore, there is no senarate Self in this body.

safate:, agraniifacara,; aq, sqefe- TT tl HS Ul

safata: Separateness awa-wifaara_ for (conscious- ness) does not exist even when there is the body 4 not (so) g but sqa@fsraa_as in the case of engnition.

54. But not (so); (a Self) separate (from the body does exist), for (conscious- ness) does not exist even when there is the body (after death); as in the case of cognition.

This Sutra refutes the view expressed in the previous one. Consciousness cannot be a quality of the body, for we do not find consciousness in a body; after a person dies. So this coh&sciousness is a quality of something different from and residing in the body. Again the Charvakas also accept that the cognizer is different from the thing cognized. If so, since we experience our body, we who cognize it must be different from our body; and this thing which cog-

nizes this body of ours is the Self, and consciousness is a quality of this Self, rather its nature.

acts, e.g. the Udgitha Updsand, are valid for all Sdkhas.

wgaTS (eg a arg fe sfataz yy 4s i

wseiaqgi: (Updsands) connected with parts (of sacrificial aets) g but 4 not Wag, to (particular) Sakhas fe because ufaaeq in each Veda.

55. But (the Updasanas) connected with parts (of sacrificial acts are) not (re- stricted) to (particular) Sakhas only of each Veda (but to all its Sakhas), because (the same Upasana is described in all).

There are certain Updsands mentioned in connec- tion with sacrificial acts, as, for example, the medita- tion on ‘Om’ which is connected with the Udgitha as Prana, or the’ meditation on the Udgitha as the earth and so on. The question is whether these medi- tations are enjoined with reference to the Udgitha and so on as belonging to a certain Sakhaé of a Veda or as belonging to all its Sakhas. The doubt arises because the Udgitha hd so on are chanted different- ly in different Sakhds, and as such they may be considered different. This Sutra refutes the view that they are so restricted, because the text speaks of these Upasanas in general, and so they are one in all the branches.

3.8.57] RBRAHMA-SUTRAS 399

nraizaretsface: t) && tl

aatizaa_Like Mantras etc. 41 or else Wada: there is no contradiction.

56. Or else Jike Mantras etc. there is no contradiction (here).

Just as Mantras ete. mentioned in only one Sakha are used in another Sakha with respect to that particular rite, so also the Upfisands connected with particular rites in one Sakha of the Veda can be applied to the other S4akhas.

U pdsand.

qe: RAAssaaEcd, agar fe agafa 4s i

ya On the entire form #4aq_ as in the case of sacrifice sad importance aa so fF for zaafa (the Sruti) shows.

57. Importance (is given to the meditation) on the entire form (of Vaisva- nara) as in the case of sacrifice; for so (the Sruti) shows.

In the Chhandogya Upanishad 5. 11-18 we have the Vaisvanara Vidya, the meditation on the cosmic form of the Lord, where we are asked to imagine that His head is the heavens, His eye the sun, and so on. In those sections we find different results mentioned for each part of the Updasanaé. For example, the

— 400 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [3.8.57

result of meditating on His head as the heavens is:

He eats food, sees his dear ones, and has Vedic

glory in his house’? (Chh. 5. 12. 2). Now the question is whether the Sruti here speaks only of one Upasana on the whole cosmic form, or also piecemeal Upasanas. This Sutra says that it is the former. The separate results mentioned for detached Updsanas are to be combined into one aggregate with the principal meditation. That the Sruti intends only the entire Upasana is moreover known from the fact that it discourages part Updsandi in such expressions as ‘Your head would have fallen if you had not come to me’? (Chh. 5, 12. 2). The case is similar to certain sacrifices which include’ several minor sacrifices, the combined result of which completes that of the main sacrifices. That only one entire Upasana is intended is also inferred from the fact that the section begins thus: ‘‘Which is our Self, which is the Brahman’”’ (Chh. 5. 11. 1)—which shows that the entire: Brahman is sought as the object of meditation. It ends also thus: “Of that Vaisvanara Self Sutejas is the head’ etc.

Vidya, Dahara Vidya, and so on are to be kept separate and not combined into one entire Updsanda.

ATAT, MEARS it 4S |

am Different wefg-Re1a_ owing to difference of

words etc.

8.3.59] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 401

58. (Various Vidyds like the San- dilya, Dahara, etc. are) different owing to difference of words etc.

In the last Sutra it was shown that though the Sruti mentions meditations on parts of the cosmic form, yet the meditation on the entire form is what is intended by the Sruti. Following this argument the opponent says that as the object of meditation is the one Lord, we are to combine all the different Vidyas like the Sandilya Vidya, Dahara Vidya, Satya Vidya, and so on into one composite meditation on the Lord. This Sutra refutes that view and says that these different Vidyas are separate, because the Sruti prescribes them using different words, ‘He knows’, ‘Let him meditate’, ‘Let him form the idea’, etc. and this difference of terms is acknowledged to be a test of the difference of acts by Purva Mimémsa. ‘Etc.’ refers to other reasons like the difference in qualities. Though the object of meditation is the one Lord, yet owing to the difference in qualities that are imagined in different Upasands He is different. Moreover, it is. an impossibility to combine all the various Vidyas into one. So the different Vidyds are to be kept separate,, and not combined into one general meditation.

any one alone should be selected according to one’s choice.. faneq:, atfafare-necara i && tl

fae; Option wfafme-qaam on account of (all Vidyas) having the same result.

59. There is option (with respect to the several Vidyas), because the result (of all the Vidyds) is the same.

As the result of all the Vidyds is the realization of Brahman, it is enough if one takes up any one of them according to his liking and sticks to it till he reaches the goal. And once Brahman is realized through one of these Vidyas, resorting to another is useless. Besides, to practise more than one medita- tion at a time would only distract one’s mind and thereby retard one’s progress. Therefore one must restrict oneself to one particular Vidya.

or may not be combined according to liking.

RTE TTH AASaAlAwA AT, YaeeT- ATATT tl 80

alt: Vidyds for particular desires q but Jararaq according to one’s desire 8484 one may combine 4 a or not qa-Sq-warara_ on account of the absence of the preceding reason

60. But Vidyas for particular desires may be combined or not according to one’s desire on account of the absence of the

3.8.61] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 408

reason (mentioned in the) previous (Sutra).

In the last Sutra it was said that any one of the Vidyas about Brahman should be taken up, and that more than one at a time should not be taken up, because each Vidyad was quite sufficient and more than one would distract the mind. Now there are various Vidyés which are practised not for the realization of Brahman, but to yield some particular desire. As, for example, in the Chhan- dogya 8. 15. 2; 7. 1. 5. The question is whether one is to restrict oneself to only one of these Vidyas, or can practise more than one at a time. This Sutra says that as the results are different, unlike that of the Brahma Vidyés, one can take up more than one Vidya or not according to one’s pleasure.

sacrificial acts muy or may not be combined according to liking.

TSH TATATTATT: | EE I wey With regard (to meditations) connected

with members (of sacrificial acts) Ga-WPyy-wNa: itis us with (the members) with which they are connected.

61. With regard (to meditations) connected with members (of sacrificial acts) it is as with (the members) with which they are connected.

Sutras 61-64 give the view of the opponent. Different instructions connected with a sacrifice are mentioned in the different Vedas. Now the scriptures themselves say that all these members mentioned in the different Vedas are to be combined for the due performance of the main one. The question now is, what is the rule to be followed with respect to the Upasands connected with these members? This Sutra says that the same rule which applies to the members applies also to the Updsands connected with them. In other words, all these Updsanas are also to be combined.

fers 1 ER I fae: From the injunction of the Sruti 4 and.

62. And from the injunction of the Sruti.

Even as the members are scattered in the differ- ent Vedas, so are also the meditations connected with them. There is no difference as regards the injunc- tion of the Sruti with respect to these meditations.

AAT tl &3 tl 63. On account of the rectification. A further reason is given by the opponent.

Now that which is Udgitha is ‘Om’, and

that which is ‘Om’ is Udgitha. (If one knows this) then from the seat (i.e. through proper functioning) of the Hotri (he) rectifies all defective singing (of the

8.8.65] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 405

Udgatri)”? (Chh. 1. 5. 5). Here it is said that the.Mistakes committed by the Udgatri (chanting priest of the Sdma-Veda) are rectified by the recitation of the Hctri (invoking priest of the Rig-Veda), which shows that the meditations, though they are given in the different Vedas, are yet interlinked. So all of them have to be observed.

WMATA ATT | EB Ul

ZU-AaNeE-qa; From the Sruti declaring the feat- ure ‘Om’ as being common to all the Vedas 4 and.

64. And from the Sruti declaring the syllable ‘Om’ which is a common feature (of the Udgitha Vidya), to be common to all the Vedas.

‘‘Through this does the Vedic Vidya proceed’’ (Chh. 1. 1. 9). This is said with reference to the syllable ‘Om’, which is common to all the Vedas and all the Updsanas in them. This shows that as the abode of all Vidy&s is common, so are the Vidyas that abide in it, and therefore all of them are to be observed.

TAT, AcaARATATAA: ES A

a at Rather not a@ewa-9aa: their correlation not being mentioned by the Sruti.

65. (The meditations connected with members of sacrificial acts are) rather not

(to be combined), as the Sruti does not say that they are so correlated.

This and the following Sutra give the conclu- sion. The rule for combining the _ instructions regarding sacrifices that are scattered in all the Vedas cannot be applied with respect to the Upasanas connected with them. In the former case, if the instructions are not combined, the sacrifice itself will fail. But not so if the Upasanas are not practised, for Upasands only enhance the results of the sacrifice. (Vide 8. 8. 42). They are not inseparable from the sacrifice. So they may or may not be practised.

zearea tt &&

ewaiq_ Because the Sruti says so 4 and.

66. And because the Sruti says so.

‘The Brahman (superintending priest) who knows this protects the sacrifice, the sacrificer, and all the other priests’? (Chh. 4. 17. 10). This shows that the scriptures do not intend that all the medita- tions should go together. If it were so, then all the priests would know all of them and there is no sense 1n the Sruti distinguishing the qualified super- intending priest from the rest.

The meditations, therefore, may or may not be combined according to one’s taste.

CHAPTER ITI

[Section IV]

In the last section were discussed the Vidyas, the means to the knowledge of Brahman. This section discusses whether this knowledge of Brahman is counected with ritualistic work through the agent, or whether it independently serves the purpose of man (Purushartha). Man tries to attain the fulfilment of his desires, discharge of duties, acquisition of wealth, and Liberation. The question is whether knowledge of Brahman serves any of these purposes, or is merely connected with sacrificial acts in co far as it imparts to the agent a certain qualification.

Tome 1: Knowledge of Brahman ts not subordinate to sacrificial acts.

quaraisa:, xeqrafa areca: | et

yaaa: Purpose of man Wa: from this wera_ from the scriptures =f thus (says) 7etaw, Badardyana.

1. From this (results) the purpose of man, because of the scriptures; thus (says) Badarayana.

Badarayana basing his arguments on the Sruti texts says that the knowledge of Brahman effects

man’s highest purpose and is not a part of sacrificial acts. It leads to Liberation. The scriptural authority referred to is texts like: ‘The knower of the Self goes beyond grief’? (Chh. 7. 1. 8); ‘‘He who knows that Supreme Brahman _ becomes indeed Brahman”? (Mu. 38. 2. 9); ‘The knower of Brahman attains the Highest’? (Taitt. 2. 1).

acareqerretarat warseaferter sift: 2 A

qaatt_ On account of being supplementary (to sacrificial acts) Jes-waale: are mere praise of the agent Jat even as Wag in other cases fa thus (says) 4 fafa: Jaimini.

2. Because (the Self) is supplement- ary (to sacrificial acts), (the fruits of the knowledge of the Self) are mere praise of the agent, even as in other cases; thus says Jaimini.

According to Jaimini the Vedas merely prescribe acts to attain certain purposes including Liberation, and nothing more. He argues that the knowledge of the Self does not yield any independent results, as Vedanta holds, but is connected with the acts through the agent. No one undertakes a sacrificial act unless he is conscious of the fact that he 1s different from the body and that after death he will go to heaven, where he will enjoy the results of his sacrifices. Texts dealing with Self-knowledge serve merely to enlighten the agent and so are sub-

3.4.4] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 409

ordinate to sacritirie] acts. The fruits, however, which the Vedanta texts declare with regard to Self-knowiedge are merely praise, even as texts declare such results by way of praise with respect to other raatters. In short, Jamini holds that by the knowledge that his Self will outlive the body, the agent becomes qualified for sacrificial actions. even as other things become fit in sacrifices through purificatory cveremunies.

AMANTMATT It 3

WA-STAE_ Because of the conduct found (from the scriptures).

3. Because we find (from the script- ures such) conduct (of men of realization).

Janaka, emperor of Videha performed a sacri-

fice in which gifts were freely distributed’’ (Brih. 3. 1. 1); “L am going to perform a sacrifice, sirs”’ (Chh. 5. 11. 5). Now both Janaka and Asvapati were knowers of the Self. If by this knowledge of the Self they had attained Liberation, there was no need for them to perform sacrifices. But the two texts quoted show that they did perform sacrifices. This proves that it is through sacrificial acts alone that one attains Liberation, and not through the knowledge of the Self, as the Vedantins hold.

THT UB Ul

aa -ga: Because the scriptures directly declare that.

4. That (viz. that knowledge of the Self stands in a subordinate relation to sacrificial acts) the scriptures directly declare.

‘That alone which is performed with knowledge, faith, and meditation becomes more _ powerful’’ (Chh. J. 1. 10); This text clearly shows that knowledge is a part of the sacrificial act. |

SANT th It

5. Because the two (knowledge and work) go together (with the departing soul to produce the results).

“It is followed by knowledge, work, and past experience”? (Brih. 4. 4. 2). This text shows that knowledge and work go together with the soul and produce the effect which it is destined to enjoy. Knowledge pe aay is not able to produce any such effect.

await fararata tl & tl

aea: For such (as know the purport of the Vedas) famata_ because (the scriptures) enjoin (work).

6. Because (the scriptures) enjoin (work) for such (as know the purport of the Vedas).

The scriptures enjoin work only for those who have a knowledge of the Vedas, which includes the

3.4.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 41)

knowledge of the Self. Hence Knowledge does not independently produce any result.

frames | 9 II fazara_On account of prescribed rules 4 and

7. And on account of prescribed rules. |

‘‘Performing works here let a man wish to live a hundred years”? (Is. 2); ‘‘Agnihotra is a sacrifice lasting up to old age and death; for through old age one is freed from it or through death’? (Sat. Br. 12. 4. 1. 1). From such prescribed rules also we find that Knowledge stands in a subordinate relation to work.

afrataznrd aecrreday, AERA Ul < tl

wfaa-sg@miat_ Because ( the scriptures) teach (the Supreme Self to be) something over and above 4 but sizuawe Badardyana’s (view) La such 7. e. cor- rect aa-aumnNa_for that is seen (from the scriptures)-

8. But because (the scriptures) teach (the Supreme Self to be) other (than the agent), Badardyana’s (view is) correct} for that is seen (from the scriptures).

Sutras 2-7 give the view of the Mimamsakas,

which is refuted in Sutras 8-17. The Vedanta texts do not teach the limited self,

which is the agent, but the Supreme Self, which is

/ 412 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.4.8

different from the agent. Thus the knowledge of the Self which the Vedanta texts declare is different from that knowledge of the self which an agent possesses. The knowledge of such a Self, which is free from all limiting adjuncts, not only does not help, but puts an end to all actions. That the Vedanta texts teach the Supreme Self is clear from such texts as the following: ‘‘He who perceives all and knows all’? (Mu. 1. 1. 9); ‘‘Under the mighty rule of this Immutable, O Gargi’’ etc. (Brih. 3. 8. 9).

get Fla et qeaq Equal 4 but ex declarations of the Sruti

9. But the declarations of the Sruti equally support both views.

This Sutra refutes the view expressed in Sutra 3. There it was shown that Janaka and others even after attaining Knowledge were engaged in work. This Sutra says that scriptural authority equally supports the view that for one who has attained Knowledge there is no work. ‘Knowing this very Self the Brahmanas renounce the desire for sons, for wealth, and for the worlds, and lead a mendicant life’? (Brih. 8. 5. 1). We also see from the scriptures that knowers of the Self like Yajnavalkya gave up work. ‘‘This much indeed is (the means of) immortality, my dear.’ Saying this Yajnavalkya left home’? (Brih. 4. 5. 15). The work of Janaka and others was characterized by non-attachment,

3.4.11] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 413

and as such it wes practically no work; so the Mimamsaé argument is weak.

HATA | Lo tl

10. ‘ (The declaration of the scripture referred to in Sutra 4) is not universally true.

The declaration of the Sruti that knowledge enhances the fruit of the sacrifice does not refer to all knowledge, as it is connected only with the Udgitha, which is the topic of the section.

FIAUT: WATT |N LL Ul

fata; (There is) division of knowledge and work weaaa_as in the case of a hundred (divided between two persons).

1]. (There is) division of knowledge and work, as in the case of a hundred (divided between two persons).

This Sutra refutes Sutra 5. ‘“‘It is followed by knowledge, work; and past experiences’? (Brih. 4. 4. 2). Here we have to take knowledge and work, in a distributive sense, meaning that knowledge follows one and work another. Just as when we say a hundred be given to these two persons, we divide it into two halves and give each man fifty. There is no combination of the two. Even without this explanation Sutra 5 can be refuted. For,the

text quoted refers only to knowledge and work, which concern the transmigrating soul, and not an emancipated soul. For the passage, ‘Thus does the man who desires (transmigrate)’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 6) shows that the previous text refers to the transmigrating self. And of the emancipated soul Sruti says, ‘But the man who never desires (never transmigrates)’’

WEATAATAATA: tl 2% Il

12. (The scriptures enjoin work) only on those who have read the Vedas.

This Sutra refutes Sutra 6.

Those who have read the Vedas and known about the sacrifices are entitled to perform work. No work is prescribed for those who have knowledge of the Self from the Upanishads. Such a knowledge is incompatible with work.

a, APTRTTT LR I

a Not “fata owing to the absence of any specification

13. Because there is no special men- tion (of the Jnani, it does) not (apply to him).

This Sutra refutes Sutra 7. The text quoted

there from the Isa Upanishad is a general statement, and,there is no special mention in it that it is

3.4.16] RRAHMA-SUTRAS 415

applicable to a Jn&ni also. In the absence of such a specification it is not binding on him.

eqaasaafaar tt 22 i

wad For the praising (of Knowledge) ‘ata: permission 4 or rather.

14. Or rather the permission (to do work) is for praising (Knowledge).

The injunction to do work for the knowers of the Self is for the glorification of this Knowledge. The praise involved in it is this: A knower of the Self may work all his life, bui on account of this Knowledge he will not be bound by its effects.

a ATARILI BH i 4 Ul aivata According to their choice 4 and tT some.

15. And some according to. their choice (have refrained from all work).

In Sutra 3 it was said that Janaka and others were engaged in work even after Knowledge. This Sutra says that some have of their own accord given up all work. The point is that after Knowledge some may choose to work to set an example to others, while others may give up all work. There is no binding on the knowers of the Self as regards work.

SWAT THLE tt

sqweq Destruction 4 and.

16. And (the scriptures say that the) destruction (of all qualifications for work results from Knowledge).

Knowledge destroys all ignorance and _ its. products like agent, act, and result. ‘‘But when to the knower of Brahman everything has become the Self, then what should one see and through what’? ete. (Brih. 4. 5. 15). The knowledge of the Self is antagonistic to all work and so cannot possibly be subsidiary to work.

HAA 4, We? fF vot

waa: ¢ To those who observe continence @ and m@ (this Asrama is mentioned) in the scriptures fe

because.

17. And (Knowledge belongs) to those who observe continence (i.e. to Sannyadsins); because (this fourth Asrama. is mentioned) in the scriptures.

The scriptures declare that Knowledge is gained in that stage of life in which continence is prescribed, i.c. the fourth stage or Sannyasa Asrama. To a Sannyasin there is no work prescribed except discrim- ination. So how can Knowledge be subservient to- work? That there is a stage of life called Sannyasa we find from the scriptures themselves in texts. like: ‘There are three branches of duty; sacrifice, study and charity are the first;... All these attain

3.4.18] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 417

to the worlds of the virtuous; but only one who is firmly established in Brahman attains immortality’’ (Chh. 2. 23. 1-2); ‘‘Desiring this world (the Self) alone monks renounce their homes’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 22). See also Mu. 1. 2. 11 and Chh. 5. 10. 1. Everyone can take to this life without being a householder etc., which shows the independence of Knowledge.

qa Stafacataat a, saazfa fe 2c tl

gaa Mere reference Hfafa: Jaimini wien there is no injunction ¥ and waaefa fe because (the script- ure) condemns (it)

18. Jaimini (thinks that in the texts referred to in the last Sutra there is) a mere reference (to Sannyasa), and not injunction, because (other texts) condemn (Sannyasa).

In the text quoted in the last Sutra (Chh. 2. 23. 1) Jaimini says that as there is no word show- ing that Sannyasa is enjoined on man, it is a mere reference and not an injunction. The Brihada- ranyaka text quoted in the last Sutra says that some person do like that. Sruti here makes a mere statement of fact. It does not enjoin Sannyasa. Moreover, the text here praises steadfastness in Brahman. ‘‘But only one who is firmly established in Brahman attains immortality.”’ Sacrifice, study,

charity, austertiy, studentship, and lifelong celibacy result in the attainment of the virtuous world. But immortality is gained only by him who is firmly established in Brahman. That is what the text says. Further, there are other texts which condemn Sannyasa. ‘‘Having brought to your teacher the wealth that he likes, do not cut off the line of progeny”? (Taitt. 1.11); ‘To him who is without a son (this) world does not belong’’ (Taitt. sa

AGS AWATAN:, APTA: | LE tl “48 ay Ought to be gone through aeaa4: Badaré- yana 9iaqa: for the scriptural text refers equally to all the four Asramas.

19. Badaradyana (thinks that San- nyasa or monastic life) also must be gone through, for the scriptural text (cited) refers equally: to all the four Asramas (stages of life).,

In the text cited, sacrifice etc. refer to the householder’s life, penance to Vanaprastha, student- ship to Brahmacharya and ‘one who is firmly established in Brahman’ to Sannyasa. So the text equally refers to all the four stages of life. The text relating to the first three stages refers to what is enjoined elsewhere. So also does the text relating to Sannydsa. Hence Sannydsa also is enjoined and must be gone through by all.

3.4.20] _ _BRAHMA-SUTRAS 419 fafaat arcorad ti 20 tt

fafa: {ujunciwa @ or rather wewaa_as in the case of the carrying (of the sacrificial fuel).

20. Or rather (there is an) injunction {in this text), as in the case of the carrying (of the sacrificial fuel).

This Sutra now tries to establish that there is an injunction about Sannyasa in the Chhandogya passage cited. There is a Sruti text referring to Agnihotra performed for the manes, which runs as follows: ‘‘Let him approach, carrying the sacri- ficial fuel below; for above he carries it for the gods.’’ The last clause Jaimini interprets as an injunction, though there is no word in it to that effect, because such an injunction is nowhere else to be found in the scriptures. On account of its newness (Apurvata) it is an injunction. Following this argument this Sutra says that in Chh. 2. 28. 1 there is an injunction with respect to Sannydasa, and not a mere reference, as it is not enjoined anywhere else. Moreover, there are Sruti texts which directly enjoin Sannyésa: ‘‘Or else he may wander forth from the students’ life, or from the house, or from— the forest’? (Jab. 4).

Again Jaimini himself says that even glorifica- tion, to be relevant, must be in a complimentary relation to an injunction. In the text cited steadfast devotion to Brahman is being praised, and so it has

an injunctive value. Now is it possible for one engaged in sacrificial rites etc. to be wholly devoted to Brahman? Devotion to Brahman means constant. meditation on It without any disturbing thought. Such a thing is impossible for a householder engaged in ritualistic work. It is possible only for a Sannyasin who has renounced all work, and not for others.

Neither is it true that Sannydsa is prescribed only for those who are lame, blind, etc., and there- fore unfit for ritualistic work. The text cited above (Jab. 4) makes no such difference. Moreover, Sannyaésa is meant as a means to the realization of Brahman, and it is to be acquired in a regular prescribed way. ‘The wandering mendicant with coloured dress, shaven-headed, accepting no gifts, qualifies himself for the realization of Brahman.” Therefore Sannyasa is prescribed by the scriptures and Knowledge, because it is enjoined on SannyaAsins, is independent of work.

which refer to Vidyds are not merely glori- ficatory but enjoin the meditations.

eqfanraqararartata Set, a, eqacaTay tt Re It

w?faataq Mere praise suteta because of their reference ( to parts of sacrificial acts) sfa da_if it be said 4 not so Wqaaiq on account of its newness.

21. If it be said (that references as in Chh. 1.1.8) are mere praise because of

3.4.22] PRAHMA-SUTRAS 421

their reference (to parts of sacrificial acts), (we say) not. so, because here it is men- tioned for the first time.

“That Udgitha (Om) is the best essence of the essences, the supreme, deserving the highest place, the eighth’? (Chh. 1. 1. 8), ‘This earth is Rich, and fire Saman’’ (Chh. 1. 6. 1). The opponent holds that these are mere praise, and no injunction to meditate on ‘Qm’ and so on. These passages are akin to, “‘The ladle is the earth’’, “‘The tortoise is the sun’’, which simply glorify the ladle and so on. This view of the opponent is refuted in the latter half of the Sutra. The analogy is not correct. Glorification to have a purpose, must be in complimentary relation to an injunction. The passages quoted for analogy stand in proximity to injunctive passages, and so they can be taken as praise. But the passage of the Chhandogya where Udgitha ‘Om’ is described as the essence of essences, is mentioned in the Upanishad, and so cannot be taken along with the injunctions about Udgitha in the Karmakanda. As_ such, on account of the newness it is an injunction and not mere glorification.

WTAMe_TSa |] RX Il wia-metq There being words expressive of injunc-

tion 4 and.

22. And there being words expres- sive of injunction.

‘Let one meditate on ‘Om’ (of) the Udgitha’’ (Chh. 1. 1. 1). In this passage we have a clear injunction to meditate on ‘Om’. On the face of this we cannot interpret the text cited in the last Sutra as mere glorificatory of ‘Om’.

do not serve the purpose of Pdériplavas and so do not form part of the ritualistic acts. They are meant to glorify the Vidyd taught in them.

atfigarat xfa Sq, a, fratfeacara i 23 1

uftzarat: For the purpose of Pariplavas sfx @q if it be said 4 not so faxfaaaiq on account of ( certain stories alone) being specified.

23. If it be said (that the stories that occur in the Upanishads are) for the pur- pose of Pariplavas, (we say) not so, be- cause (certain ‘stories alone) are specified (by the Sruti for this purpose).

In the Aswamedha sacrifice, which lasts for one year, the sacrificer and his family are expected to hear at intervals the recital of certain stories. These are known as Pariplavas, and form part of the ritu- alistic acts. The question is whether Upanishadic stories also serve this purpose, in which case they become part of the rites, and this means that the whole of Jnaénakanda becomes subservient to Karma- kanda. The stories referred to are those relating to

8.4.25] _- BRAHMA-SUTRAS 428

Yajnavalkya and Mitrevi, Pratardana and so on, which we find in the Brihadaranyaka, Kaushitaki and other Upanishads.

This Sutra denies that they serve the purpose of Pariplavas, for the scripture specifies the stories that are meant for this purpose. Any and every story cannot serve this purpose. Upanishadic stories are not mentioned in this category.

fe) AIT AMITSTATITAT || Vw tl vet So @ and wamnwnr-su4qa being connected as one whole.

24. And so (they are meant to illus- trate the nearest Vidyds), being connected as one whole.

The stories not serving the purpose of Pariplavas they are intended to introduce the Vidyas. The story form is meant to catch the imagination of the student, who will thereby be more attentive to the Vidya described.

acts, as Knowledge serves their purpose.

AA OT AAAWATATTAAT |] A Il

sazva Therefore 3 and wy-sanfe-water no neces sity of lighting fires etc.

25. And, therefore, there is no neces- sity of lighting fires, and so on.

In Sutra 38.4.1. it was said that the knowledge of the Self results in the attainment of the highest Purushartha or goal of life. Therefore the lighting of fires for sacrifices and other similar acts enjoined on the householders etc. need not be observed by Sannydsins, as Knowledge alone fulfils their object.

scriptures. are useful as they are an indirect means to Knowledge. —

walter @ aarfeera:, sara i 26

aaitet There is the necessity of all works @ and gated: for the scriptures prescribe sacrifices etc. (as means to Knowledge) Waaq even as the horse.

s 26. And there is the necessity of all works, for the scriptures prescribe sacri- fices etc. (as means to the attainment of Knowledge, though they are unnecessary for the attainment of its results, vz. Liberation), even as the horse (is used to draw a chariot and not for ploughing).

From the previous Sutra we may conclude that works are altogether useless. This Sutra says that all these works are useful, and that even the scriptures prescribe them, since they serve as a means to Knowledge. But they have no part in producing the result of this Knowledge, viz. Liberation. It comes only from Knowledge and not from work.

3.4.27] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 425

Work purifies the mind, and the knowledge of the Self is manifested in such a pure mind. So works

have a place as a means to Knowledge, though an indirect one.

NAGATA: Earaashy gq, afeseaggeerar AATAATLATTSACATA | 2 Nl

wa-auife-adq: Ze One must possess calinness, self-control, and the like aa fy even if it be so q but afea: since they are enjoined aewaat as helps to Knowledge @a-waxg-wqe 4714 and therefore they have necessarily to be observed.

27. But even if it be so (ie. -even though thexe is no injunction to do work to attain Knowledge in the text [Brih. 4. 4. 22]) one must possess calmness, self- control, and the like, since these are enjoined as helps to Knowledge, and there- fore have necessarily to be observed.

“The Brihmanas seek to know It through the study of the Vedas, sacrifices, charity’’ etc. {Brih. 4. 4, 22). In this text there is no word to show that sacrifice is enjoined on one who wants to know Brahman. So the opponent says that there is no need at all of work for an aspirant of Knowledge. This Sutra says that even if it be so, yet control of the senses etc. are enjoined by the Sruti: ‘‘There- fore he who knows it as such becomes self-controlled,

4260 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.4.29

calm... sees the Self in his self’? etc. (Brih. 4. 4. 28). This passage is injunctive in character, for ‘therefore’ expresses praise of the subject-matter and hence is connected with an injunction, because in the absence of an injunction the praise would be purposeless. Since these qualities are enjoined, they have neces- sarily to be practised. Self-control etc. directly help the attainment of Knowledge, while work helps it indirectly.

waived only when life is at stake.

WaAAAAfaa ATTA, ACRATT Il Ve I

aa-wa-ayafa: Permission to take all sorts of food marae when life is jeopardized aq-exaq because the Sruti declares that.

28. (Only) when life is jeopardized (there is) permission to take food indis- criminately, because the Sruti declares. that.

For one who knows this, there is nothing that

is not food’? (Chh. 5. 2. 1). The opponent holds that on account of the newness of the statement it is enjoined on one who meditates on Prana. Such a statement being found nowhere else, it has an injunc- tive value. This Sutra refutes it and says that it is not an injunction, but only a statement of fact, and where the idea of an injunction does not arise, we are not justified in assuming one. Prohibited

8.4.31] BRALIMA-SUTRAS 427

food may be eaten only when life is in danger, as was done by thesage Chakrayana when he was dying for want of food. This fact we get from the Sruti.

BAATATSS |] VE I

warmq Because of a non-contradiction (thus) 4 and,

29. And because (thus) (the script- ural statements with respect to food) are not contradicted.

‘“When the food is pure the mind becomes pure”’ (Chh. 7. 26. 2). This statement will not be contra- dicted Ga if the eepananon given is taken, and not otherwise.

aifq =] Aaa | 30 Il

wig @ Moreover #a@ the Smritis say so.

80. Moreover the Smritis (also) say

SO.

The Smritis also say that both those who have Knowledge and those who have not can take any food when life is in danger; then it is not sinful. But they prohibit various kinds of food as objectionable.

MATA SHAMIL U1 3 tl we: The scriptural text 4 and Wa: hence WaaAMe prohibiting license.

31. And hence the scriptural text prohibiting license.

-428 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [3.4.31

There are scriptural passages prohibiting one from doing everything just as one pleases. License. freedom from all discipline, cannot help us to attain Knowledge. ‘‘Therefore a Brahmana must not drink liquor’? (Kathaka Sam.). Such Sruti texts are meant for this discipline.

Therefore it is established that the Sruti does not enjoin on one who meditates on Prana to take all kinds of food indiscriminately.

performed by even one who is not desirous of Knowledge.

fafzacarsarranarte |) 32 1

fafeacaiq Because they are enjoined 4 and Wa-Ha duties of the Asrama (order of life) #4 also.

32. And: the duties of the Asrama (are to be performed) also (by him who does not desire Liberation), because they are enjoined (on him by the scriptures).

In Sutra 25 it was said that works are a means to Knowledge. The question is raised, since it is so why should one who does not desire Knowledge do these works? This Sutra says that since these duties are enjoined on all who are in these Asramas or stages of life, viz. student life, householder’s life, and hermit life, one should observe them.

3.4.34 BRAHMA-SUTRAS 429

aaariicaa | 32 Il

weataq Asa means to Knowledge 4 and.

38. And (the duties are to be per- formed also) as a means to Knowledge.

Here we have to understand that the duties are helpful in producing Knowledge, but not its fruit, viz. Liberation, which is not attainable cxcept through Knowledve.

aqua a oa, Taafesa Be Ul

adat “fa In all cases & va the same duties (have to be performed) 3¥a-fasiy because of the twofold indicatory mark.

34. In all cases the same duties (have to be performed), because of the twofold indicatory mark.

The question is raised whether the work done as enjoined on the Asramas and those done as aids to Knowledge are of two different kinds. This Sutra says that in either case, whether as duties of the Asramas or as aids to Knowledge, the same duties are to be done, as is seen from the Sruti and the- Smriti texts.

‘‘The Brahmanas seek to know It through the study of the Vedas, sacrifices’? etc. (Brih. 4. 4, 22). This text shows that sacrifices etc. enjoined in Karmakanda for different purposes are to be per- formed as means to Knowledge also. The Smriti also

says the same thing. ‘‘He who performs obligatory work without desire for fruits’? etc. (Gité 6. 1). Those very obligatory duties subserve Knowledge

also. sahara @ esata i 3% I

wafaaa Not being overpowered 4 und ewafa the

scripture shows.

35. And the scripture shows (that one endowed with Brahmacharya) is not over- powered (by anger etc.).

‘For that self does not perish which one attains by Brahmacharya’”’ (Chh. 8. 5. 3). This text also shows that like work Brahmacharya etc. are also means to Knowledge. One endowed with it is not overcome by anger, jealousy, etc., and his mind not being disturbed he is able to practise Knowledge.

Therefore works are obligatory on the Asramas and are also means to Knowledge.

Asramas are also entitled to Knowledge.

arat aria gq, ages: tl 3é Ui watt (Persons standing) in between (two Asra- mas) 4 and “fq q also agee: such cases being seen. 36. And (persons standing) in_ be- tween (two Asramas) are also (entitled to Knowledge), because such cases are seen.. The question is raised whether persons of

8.4.38] _ BRAHMA-SUTRAS 431

dubious position—v-ho have not the means etc. to do the duties of an Asrama, or who stand midway between two Asramas, as for example a widower— are entitled to Knowledge or not. The opponent holds that they are not, since they cannot do the works of any Asrama which are means to Knowl- edge. This Sutra says that they are entitled, for such cases are seen.rom the scriptures, as for example Raikva and Gérgi, who had the knowledge of Brahman. Vide Chh. 4, 1 and Brih. 3. 6 and 8.

Cwm wifq ] aaa i 39 Il «fay Further waa the Smriti records such cases.

37. The Smriti also records such cases.

,Samvarta and other Rishis, without doing the works enjoined on the Asramas, became great Yogis.

fastarsaETsy i 3S A fang-wqqe: Favour due to special works 4 and. 88. And special works favour (Know-

ledge).

A widower, who cannot be said to be a house- holder in the proper sense of the word or a poor man who has not the means to perform the duties of the Asrama, can attain Knowledge through special works like prayer, fasting, Japa etc., which are not opposed to the condition of those who do not belong to any Asrama.

AAKITALTSTATAT BETES U1 BE It

wa: Than this q but svawqthe other Wa: better fasiq because of the indicatory marks 4 and.

39. But better than this is the other (state of being in some Asrama or other), (being maintained by the Sruti and the Smriti) and because of the indicatory marks (in the Sruti and the Smriti).

Though it is possible for one who stands be- tween two Asramas to attain Knowledge, yet both the Sruti and Smriti say directly and indirectly that it is a better means to Knowledge to belong to some Asrama. ‘“‘The Brahmanas seek to know It through... sacrifices’? etc. (Brih. 4. 4. 22)—this is. a direct statement of the Sruti; ‘‘Any other knower of Brahman who has done good deeds’”’ etc. (Brih. 4. 4. 9), and ‘Let not a Brahmana stay even for a day outside the. Asrama’’—these are indirect state- ments of the Sruti and Smriti respectively. _

celibacy (Sannydsa) cannot revert back to his former stages of life.

agqyaey Ff ATagra:, Sacha, freraraa_at- WTARA || Bo tl

axa For one who has attained that (the highest Asrama) 9 but 4 no Wasa: ceasing from that afaa: of

8.4.41] | BRAHMA-SUTRAS 488

Jaimini (is this opinion) 8ft also faaa-waza-saTa: on account of restrictions prohibiting such reversion.

40. But for one who has risen to the highest Asrama (1.e. Sanny4sa) there is no reverting (to the preceding ones), on account of restrictions prohibiting such reversion. Jaimini also (is of this opin- ion).

The question whether one who has embraced Sannydsa can go back to the previous Asrama is taken up for discussion. This Sutra says that he cannot, because the Sruti expressly forbids it. ‘‘He is to go to the forest. he is not to return from there.” But there are no rules allowing a reversion, like those which sanction the ascent to higher Asramas. It is als. against approved custom. So one cannot revert from Sannydsa.

cow of lifelong celibacy.

aa sofaariaata, carga, ATATT Be i

a Not 3 and wifwartfcaa (expiation) mentioned in the chapter dealing with the qualification ¥fa even yaa-aqatar because a fall (in his case) is inferred from the Smriti azaiara_and because of its inefficacy

(in his case).

41. And (the expiation), although mentioned in the chapter dealing with qualifications (in Purva Mimamsa), is not (with reference to one who has taken the vow of lifelong celibacy), because a fall (in his case) is inferred from the Smriti, and because of its (of the expiatory ceremony) inefhicacy (in his case).

The case of those who have taken the vow of lifelong celibacy and yet have transgressed this vow through a mistake in judgment, is taken up for discussion. The opponent, whose view is given in this Sutra, holds that for such transgressions there is no expiation. For no such ceremony is mentioned with respect to them, the one mentioned in Purva Mimamsa 6. 8. 22 referring to ordinary Brahma- charins, who are students, and not to Naishthika Brahmacharins. It can also be inferred that the Smriti declares such lapses as not expiable. A behead- ed man cannot be cured. ‘For him who lapses after having embraced the vow of a Naishthika Brahma- chari I see no expiatory.ceremony by which such a suicide can be purified.’’ The Smriti here does not refer to the ordinary Brahmacharin, and so the expia- tory ceremony applies only to them and not to the Naishthika. Moreover, the ceremony referred to in Purva Mimémsa is not efficacious in his case, for, to perform the ceremony he will have to light the sacrificial fire and therefore have to marry, which

3.4.42] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 485

means that he will cease to be a Naishthika there- after, | |

SAQA | TH ATL, AIA, ATH V2 il

sqyaq Prefixed with ‘Upa’, i.e. an Upapataka or a minor sin Wy 4q but tw some wag the existence wa7raq_ as in the case of eating @4_ this 8% is ex- plained in Purva MimamsaA.

42. But some (consider this trans- gression on the part of the Naishthika) a minor sin (and therefore claim) the exist- ence (of expiation for it), as in the case of eating (prohibited food by ordinary Brah- macharins). This is explained in Purva Mimamsa.

Some, however, think that such lapses on the part of a Naishthika, other than disloyalty to teacher’s wife etc., are minor sins and not major ones, and so can be expiated by proper ceremonies, even as ordinary Brahmachfrins who take prohibited food are again purified by expiatory ceremonies. The reference to the text denying any such ceremony in his case is meant only to bring home to the Naish- thika Brahmachiari the grave responsibility on his part so that he may struggle with all his soul. Similarly in the case of the recluse and the Sannyasin. As a matter of fact, the Smriti does prescribe the purificatory ceremony for both the recluse and the Sannyasin. ‘The recluse when he has broken his

vows undergoes the Krichchhra penance for twelve nights and then develops a place which is full of trees and grass.’? The Sannyasin also undergoes the purificatory ceremony, with certain modifications.

vows to be shunned by society.

TVA SATAN | B21

afe: Outside 9 but guga-wfq in either case @@: from the Smriti wara from custom 4 and.

43. But in either case (they are to be kept) outside the society, on account of the Smriti and custom.

Whether the lapses be regarded as major sins or minor sins, in elther case good people are to avoid such transgressors; because the Smriti and approved custom both condemn them.

ordinate members of sacrificial acts are to be gone through by the priest and not by the sacrificer.

arfaa:, HELARATAT: || Vs Il

wifaa: To the sacrificer Ga-9a: from the decla- ration of results in the Sruti fa thus waa: Atreya.

44. To the sacrificer (belongs the agentship in meditations), because the

3.4.46] BRAHMA-SUTRAS | 437

Sruti declares a fruit (for it); thus Atreya (thinks).

The question is raised as to who is to observe the meditations connected witb subordinate members of sacrificial acts, whether it is the sacrificer or the priest. The opponent, represented by the sage Atreya, holds that it is to be observed by the sacri- ficer, as the Sruti declares a special fruit for these meditations.

afeasafreatgatfa:, ren fe aftrtaa nes tl

wifasaq The duty of the Ritvik (priest) sfa thus wisetfa: Audulomi a@ for that fe because ufi@aa he is paid. 45. (They are) the duty of the Ritvik (priest), thus thinks Audolomi, because he

is paid for that (2.e. the performance of the whole sacrifice).

Since the priest is paid for all his acts, and thereby the fruit of all his acts is, as it were, pur- chased by the sacrificer, the meditations also come under this category and have to be observed by the priest and not the sacrificer. This is the view of the sage Audulomi.

STLaATa tl Be Il

aa@: From the Sruti Mand. 46. And because the Sruti so declares.

‘“‘Whatever blessing the priests pray for at the sacrifice, they pray for the good of the sacrificer’’ (Sat. Br. 1. 8. 1. 26). Such texts declare that the fruit of meditations in which the priest is the agent, goes to the sacrificer. Therefore Audulomi’s view is correct, being supported by the Sruti texts.

besides: scholarship and the childlike state.

meararacheafa: wor gata aga:, faear- faq Nl BO I

aearncfafy; Injunction of another auxiliary (to Knowledge) 4@w as an alternative aga: for one who possesses it (i.e. Knowledge) @daq a third one faenfeaa_as in the case of injunctions and the like.

47. (The meditative state is) the in- junction of another auxiliary (to Knowl- edge), which is a third one (besides the two expressly enjoined), as an _ alternative (where the knowledge of diversity is per- sistent) for one who possesses Knowledge; as in the case of injunctions and the like.

‘‘Therefore a knower of Brahman, having done with scholarship should remain like a child (free from anger, passions, etc.); and after having finished with this state and with learning he becomes medita- tive (Muni)” (Brih. 8. 5. 1). The question is whether

3.4.48] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 489.

the meditative state is enjoined or not. The opponent holds that it is not enjoined, as there is no word indicating an injunction. The text merely says that he becomes a Muni or meditative, whereas with respect to scholarship end the state of a child free from all passions, it expressly enjoins, ‘one should remain’ etc. Moreover, scholarship refers to Knowledge and therefore includes Munihood which also more or less refers to Knowledge. Therefore there is no newness with respect to Munihood in the text, it being included in scholarship already, and not being an Apurva it has no injunctive value.

This Sutra refutes this view and says that Munihood or meditativeness is enjoined in the text as a third requisite besides scholarship and the state of a child. For Munihood is not merely Knowledge but meditativeness, continuous devotion to Knowl-_ edge and as such it is different from scholarship. Hence, not having been referred to before, it is a new thing (Apurva), and therefore the text has injunctive value. Such meditativeness has a value for a Sannydsin who is not yet established in the knowledge of unity, and persistently experiences diversity owing to past impressions.

Ecantrara DikotTagaqe: tt ve Ut

weaurart_ On account of the householder’s life including all § wade (the chapter), ends afer with the householder

48. on account of the house- holder’s life including (duties from) all (the other stages of life), the chapter ends with the (enumeration of the duties of the) householder.

In the Chhandogya Upanishad we find that after enumerating the duties of the Brahmacharin it enumerates those of the householder, and there it ends without any mention of Sannydsa. If this also is one of the Asramas, why is nothing said about it in that placer The Sutra says that in order to lay stress on the householder’s life, to show its import- ance, the Sruti ends there without referring to Sannyasa, and not because it is not one of the pre- scribed Asramas. The householder’s life is important because for him are prescribed, besides his own duties, those of other Asramas like study, control of the senses, etc. It includes more or less duties of all Asramas.

Maa eatarAcgazanag | Ve tt

dtaaa_Even as the state of a Muni (Sannydsa) zataiq of the others Wh even Bsyzwa_ on account of scriptural instruction.

49. Because the scripture enjoins the other (stages of life, viz. Brahmacharya and Vanaprastha) even as it enjoins the state of a Muni (Sannyasa).

8.4.50] BRAHMA-SUTRAS, SAL

Just as the Sruti enjoins Sannyasa and house- holder’s life, sb also it enjoins the life of a recluse and that of a student. Hence the scriptures enjoin all the fou; Asramas or stages of life to be gone through, in sequence or alternatively. The plural number ‘others’ instead of the dual is to derote the different classes of these two stages of life.

innocence, being free from auger, passion, etc.

is WANT SAL, APTA | 4 Il waifaenaqy Without manifesting himself wand on account of the context.

50. (The childlike state means) with- out manifesting himself, on account of the context.

In the passage of the Brihadaranyaka quoted in Sutra 47, the childlike state is enjoined on an aspirant after Knowledge. The question is what is exactly meant by this? Does it mean to be like a child without any idea of purity and impurity and doing whatever one likes, or does it mean to be guileless and without the sense of egoism as a child? The Sutra says it is the latter and not the former, because that is detrimental to Knowledge. It means one has not to manifest or give vent to any of the passions and has to be guileless and without the sense of egoism. It refers to the innate innocence of a

442, BRAHMA-SUTRAS [8.4.50

child. Such a meaning alone is appropriate to the context, purity and innocence being helpful to Knowledge.

when the Vidyd is practised.

Ufenacmeqatfadest, ATTA Se It

tfeaq In this life wf even saga-nfaata if there is no obstruction to it (the means adopted) a4-e1nq because it is so seen from the scriptures.

51. (The fruition of Knowledge may take place) even in this life if there be no obstruction to it (the means adopted), because it is so seen from the scriptures.

From Sutra 26 the various means to Knowledge have been discussed. The question now is whether Knowledge resulting from these means comes in this life or in the life to come. This Sutra says that it may come in this life only if there is no obstruction to its manifestation from extraneous causes. For it often happens that when the fruition of Knowledge is about to take place it is retarded by the fruit of some other stronger work, which is also about to fructify. In such cases Knowledge comes in the next life. That is why the scriptures declare that it is difficult to realize the Self. ‘‘Even to hear of It is not available to many; many even having heard of It cannot comprehend”’ ete. (Kath.

8.4.52] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 443

1. 2. 7). The Gita also says: ‘There he is united with the inteliigence acquired in his former body” ete. (Gita 6. 43); ““The Yogi, striving assiduously, purified of taint, gradually gaining perfection through many births, then reaches the highest goal’? (Ibid 6. 45). Moreover, that Knowledge sometimes fructi- fies in the next life is known from the life of Vamadeva who possessed Knowledge even while he was in the womb. This shows that it must have been the result of his past actions, for he could not have practised any Vidyas in the womh. Knowledge did not manifest in his previous life owing to obstruc- tion, and this being removed when he was in the womb, Knowledge fructified as a result of his past Sadhana.

i.c. in the cognition of Brahman—it is of one kind in all cases.

ad afanetam:, aqaqeuTTaeeaeurs- TA WSR

uaa Like this afaaa-wiaaa: there is no rule with respect to Liberation, the fruit (of Knowledge) aa- waw-waya because the Sruti asserts that state (to be immutable).

52. With respect to Liberation, the fruit (of Knowledge) there is no rule like

hd, BRAHMA-SUTRAS [3.4.52

this, because the Sruti asserts that state {to be immutable).

In the last Sutra it was seen that Knowledge may result in this life or the next according to the absence or presence of obstructions and the intens- ity of the means adopted. Similarly a doubt may arise that there may be some such rule with respect to Liberation also, which is the fruit of Knowledge. In other words, the question is whether Liberation can be delayed after Knowledge, and whether there are degrees of Knowledge according to the qualifica- tions of the aspirant. This Sutra says that no such rule exists with respect to Liberation. Because the Sruti texts assert that the nature of final release is uniform, without any variations of degree in it. The state of final release is nothing but Brahman. ‘The knower of Brahman becomes Brahman,’’ and there can be no variety in it, as Brahman is without qualities. Difference is possible only where there are qualities, as in the case of the Saguna Brahman, about which according to difference in Vidyas there may be difference in the cognitions. But with respect to the cognition of Brahman, it can be only one and not many. Neither can there be any delay in the attainment of Liberation after Knowledge has dawned for knowledge of Brahman itself is Liberation.

The repetition of the clause ‘Because the Sruti asserts that state’ is to show that the chapter ends here.


CHAPTER IV
----------

[Section I]

In the third chapter the means to Knowledge were discussed. In th's chapter the result of Knowl- edge and some other topics are taken up for dis- cussion. In the beginning, however, a special dis- cussion connected with the means to Knowledge is. dealt with.

the scriptures is to be repeated till Knowledge is attained.

mata: TaARTISN it tl wiafq: Repetition (is necessary) Waa repeatedly syemsiq on account of instruction by the scriptures.

1. The repetition (of hearing, reflec- tion, and meditation on the teaching of the Self is necessary), on account of the repeated instruction by the scriptures.

“The Self, my dear Maitreyi, should be realized —should be heard of, reflected on, and meditated upon”’ (Brih. 2. 4. 5). “The intelligent aspirant after Brahman, knowing about this alone, should attain intuitive knowledge’? (Brih. 4. 4. 21). The question arises whether what is enjoined in this is to be done.

M6 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.1.1

once only or repeatedly. The opponent holds that it is to be observed once only, even as sacrifices like Prayaja are to be performed once only to yield the desired result. This Sutra refutes the view and says that the hearing etc. must be repeated till there is intuition of Brahman. Of course, if the knowledge of Brahman is attained by a single act, it is well and good; otherwise there is the necessity of repetition till the Knowledge dawns. It is_ the repetition of these acts that finally leads to intuition. The case of the Praydja is not to the point. For there the result is Adrishta, which yields fruit at some particular future time. Here the result is directly perceived, and so, if the result is not there, the process must be repeated till the result is seen. Moreover, scriptural texts like the first one cited above give repeated instruction, thereby signifying the repetition of the means. Again ‘meditation’ and ‘reflection’ imply a repetition of the mental act, for when we say, ‘he meditates on it’, we imply the continuity of the act of remembrance of the object. Similarly with respect to ‘reflection’. It follows, therefore, that there must be repetition of the instruction. This holds good even in those cases where the texts do not give instruction repeatedly, as for example, in the second

text cited above. fegtea i 2

fawtq On account of the indicatory mark 4 and.

4.1.8] BR.AAHMA-SUTRAS 4A7

2. And on account of the indicatory mark.

‘Reflect upon the rays, and you will have many sons’.(Chh. 1. 5. 2). This text prescribes repeated meditation by asking to meditate cn the Udgitha as the rays instead of as the sun. And what holds good in this case is equally applicable to other meditations also. And it is not true that repetition is not necessary. If it were so, the Sruti would not have taught the truth of the statement ‘That you art’ repeatedly. There may be people who are so advanced, and so little attached to the world of sense objects, that in their case a single hearing of the statement may result in Knowledge. But gener- ally such advanced souls are very rare. Ordinary people, who are deeply rooted in the idea of the body ard the senses, do not realize the truth by a single enunciation of it. This wrong notion of theirs goes: only through repeated practice of the truth, and it is only then that Knowledge dawns. So repetition has the effect of removing this wrong notion gradually, till even the last trace of it is removed. When the body consciousness is com- pletely removed, the Self manifests Itself in all purity.

Brahman the meditator is to comprehend It as identical with himself.

aeafa qnreatra areata a tt 2 tt

wiafa As the self q but samefm acknowledge aeafet teach ¥ also.

8. But (the Sruti texts) acknowledge (Brahman) as the self (of the meditator) and also teach others (to realize It as such).

The question whether Brahman is to be compre- hended by the individual soul as identical with it or separate from it, is taken up for discussion. The opponent holds that Brahman is to be comprehended as different from the individual soul on account of their essential difference. For one is subject to misery, while the other is not. This Sutra refutes the view and holds that Brahman is to be compre- hended as identical with one’s self; for in reality the two are identical, the experience of misery etc. by the individual soul—in other words, the Jiva- hood—being due to the limiting adjunct, the internal organ. (Vide 2.'8. 29 ante.) For instance, the Jabalas acknowledge it. ‘‘I am indeed You, O Lord, and You art indeed myself.’? Other scriptural texts also say the same thing: “I am Brahman”? (Brih. 1. 4. 10); ‘This self is the Brahman’’ (Ma. 2). These texts are to be taken in their primary, and not secondary sense, as in, ‘‘The mind is Brahman’’ (Chh. 3. 18. 1), where the text presents the mind as a symbol for contemplation.

Hence we have to meditate on Brahman as being the self.

4.1.4] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 448.

jor contempiacion, the meditator is not to comprehend them as identical with him.

aodth. a fe a: yen 4 Not at@ in the symbol @ is not fe because @: he.

4, (The meditator is) not (to see the

self) in the symbol, because he is not (that).

‘The mind is Brahman’? (Chh. 8. 18. 1). In such meditations, where the mind is taken as a symbol of Brahman, is the meditator to identify himself with the mind, as in the case of the medita- tion “Lf am Brahman’’? The opponent holds that he should, for the mind is a product of Brahman according to Vedinta, and as such it is one with It. So is the individual soul, the meditator, one with Brahman. Hence it follows that the meditator also is one with the mind, and therefore he should see his self in the mind in this meditation also. This Sutra refutes it. In the first place, if the symbol, mind, is cognized as identical with Brahman, then it ceases to be a symbol, even as when we realize an ornament as gold, we forget its individual character of being an ornament. Again, if the meditator is conscious of his identity with Brahman, then he ceases to be the individual soul, the meditator. The act of meditation can take place only where these

distinctions exist, and unity has not been realized; and where there is knowledge of diversity, the meditator is quite distinct from the symbol. As such he is not to see his self in the symbol.

are to be viewed as Brahman and not in the reverse way.

senghe:, SHAT NI

aa-efe: Viewing as Brahman vemsta_ on account

Rp of the elevation.

5. (The symbol is) to be viewed as Brahman (and not in the reverse way), on account of the elevation (of the symbol

thereby).

In meditations on symbols as in, The mind is Brahman’’, ‘“‘The sun is Brahman’’ the question is whether the symbol is to be regarded as Brahman, or Brahman as the symbol. The Sutra says that the symbols, the mind and the sun, are to be regarded as Brahman and not vice versa. Because it is only by looking upon an inferior thing as a superior thing that we can progress, and not in the reverse way. Inasmuch as our aim is to get rid of the idea of differentiation and see Brahman in everything, we have to meditate upon these symbols as That.

4.1.6] BRAHMA-SUTRAS » 51

sacrificial acts the idea of the divinity is to be superimposed on the members and not vice versa.

sifgearigaaaere, STITT: wt & Ul

wifeaife-aaa: The ideas of the sun ete. @ and vF in a subordinate member (of sacrificial acts) wage: because of consistency.

6. And the ideas of the sun etc. (are to be superimposed) on the subordinate members (of sacrificial acts), because (in that way alone would the statement of the scriptures) be consistent.

‘‘One ought to meditate upon that which shines yonder as the Udgitha’”’ (Chh. 1. 8. 1); ‘‘One ought to meditate upen the Saman as fivefold’’ etc. (Chh. 2. 2. 1). In meditations connected with sacrificial acts as given in the texts quoted, how is the meditation to be observed? For example, in the first cited text, is the sun to be viewed as the Udgitha, or the Udgitha as the sun? Between the Udgitha and the sun there is nothing to show which is superior, as in the previous Sutra, where Brahman being pre- eminent, the symbol was viewed as Brahman. This Sutra says that the members of sacrificial acts, as here the Udgitha, are to be viewed as the sun and so on. Because by so doing the fruit of the sacrificial act is enhanced, as the scriptures say. If we view the

452 | BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.1.6

Udgitha as the sun, it undergoes a certain ceremonial purification and thereby contributes to the Apurva, the invisible fruit of the whole sacrifice. But by the reverse way, the sun being viewed as the Udgitha, the purification of the sun by this meditation will not contribute to the Apurva, inasmuch as the sun is not a member of the sacrificial act. So if the statement of the scriptures that the meditations enhance the result of the sacrifice, is to come true, the members of the sacrificial acts are to be viewed as the sun etc.

aratt:, AAI | 9 I wala: Sitting aavat_because of the possibility.

7. (One has to practise Updasana) sitting, because (in that way alone) it 1s possible. 7

As Upasana or contemplation is a mental affair, the posture of the body is immaterial-—says the oppo- nent. This Sutra says that one has to meditate sit- ting, for it is not possible to meditate while standing or lying down. In Updsanaé one has to concentrate one’s mind on a single object, and this is impossible if one is standing or lying.

ATATSSA I < Il

rate On account of meditation (implying that) @ and.

4.1.10] | BRAHMA-SUTRAS 9 #8

8. And on account of meditation (implying that).

The word ‘Updsana’ also means exactly what meditation means, viz. concentrating on a single object, with fixed look, and without any movement of the limbs. This is possible only in a sitting posture. |:

aaaed AIST tt & tl waqaRq Immobility 4 and wea referring to. 9. And referring to (its) immobility {the scriptures attribute meditativeness to the earth).

““The earth meditates as it were’’—in such state- ments meditativeness is ascribed to the earth on account of its immobility or steadiness. So we learn that steadiness is a concomittance of meditation, and that is possible only while sitting and not while standing or walking. |

eazfra = i] 20 Il

afer The Smriti texts say 4 also.

10. The Smriti texts also say (the same thing).

‘Hfaving made a firm seat for one’s self.on a pure spot”? etc. (Gita 6. 11)—in this text the sitting posture is prescribed for meditation.

454 (| BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.1.12

no restriction of place.

TARTAAT AA, AAAI th LE

ga Wherever walaat concentration of mind 44 there wfaieq for want of any specification.

11. Wherever concentration of mind (is attained), there (it is to be practised), there being no specification (as to place).

The object of meditation is to attain concentra- tion, and so any place is good if concentration is attained in that place. That is why the scriptures say, “Select any place suitable and convenient”’; ‘‘Where the mind is buoyant there one should concentrate’, and so on. But places that are clean, free from pebbles, fire, sand, and so on, are desirable, as such places are helpful to meditation. But all the same there are no fixed rules as to place.

ar orate, ares fe FEAL Lz Ul w mama Till death aa then sf even fe because zeq is seen ( from the scriptures ). 12. Till death (meditations have to be observed), because (their observance) even at that moment is seen (from the

scriptures). In the first topic of this section it was said that

4.1.13] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 455

meditations on Brahman are to be repeated till Knowledge duwrs. The question is now taken up about other meditations which are practised for attaining certain results. The opponent holds that such meditations can be stopped after a certain time; they would still yield results, like sacrifices performed only onee. This Sutra says that they are to be continued till death, for the Sruti and Smriti say so. “With whatever thought he passes away from this world’? (Sat. Br. 10. 6. 3. 1). ‘‘Remembering what- ever form of being he leaves this body”’ ete. (Gita 8. 6). Such a thougiit at the Lime of death as fixes the course of life hereafter canot be had at that moment without lifelong practice. Hence meditations must be practised till death.

the effects of all past and future evil deeds.

aafana sacqatratcsarfaaan, ager- AMT i 23 Ul

aa-afuaa When that is realized But-ge-waay: of the subsequent and previous sins aq 9-famstt non-clinging and destruction aaa because it is declared (by

the scriptures).

18. When that (Brahman) is realized (there result) the non-clinging and de- struction of the subsequent and previous

sins respectively, because it is (so) declared (by the scriptures).

The state of Jivanmukti is described here. The opponent holds that Liberation is attained, in spite of Knowledge, only after one has experienced the results of one’s sins committed before illumination. For the Smritis say, ‘“Karma is not destroyed before it has given its results.” The law of Karma is inexorable. This Sutra says that when a person attains Knowledge, all his past sins are destroyed and future sins do not cling to him. For by realizing Brahman he experiences that he never was, nor is, nor will be an agent, and such a person cannot be affected by the result of sins. The scriptures also declare that. ‘‘Just as cotton growing on reeds is burnt when thrown into fire, even so are burnt the sins of one who knowing this offers Agnihotra’’ (Chh. 5. 24. 8); The fetters of the heart are broken, all doubts are solved, and all works are destroyed when He who is high and low is seen’? (Mu. 2. 2. 8); “As water does not wet the lotus leaf, even so no sins cling to him who knows it’? (Chh. 4. 14. 38). What the Smritis say about the inexorability of the law of Karma is true only of ordinary people, and does not hold good in the case of the knowers of Brahman. And in this way alone can Liberation result—by snapping the chain of work. Otherwise Liberation can never take place.

4.1.15] BRAHMA-SUTRAS » 457

_ Lopic 10: -Goca deeds likewise cease to affect the lnower of Brahman.

CALETA AIARIST:, WA FT il VY Il

ratq@ Of the other Wt also way thus WeRs: non- clinging Wa at death q but.

14. Thus there is non-clinging of the other (i.e. virtue) also; but at death (Liberation i.e. Videhamukti is certain).

As a knower of Brahman has no idea of agency he is not affected by good deeds also. He goes beyond vice and virtue. ‘‘He overcomes both’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 22). And as he is not touched by vice or virtue after illumination, and as his past sins are destroyed by Knowledge, his Liberation at death is certain,

results are ulone destroyed by Knowledge and not those which have already begun to yield results.

AATLETHTA OT F YS, ATTA tl 24 I waza-ara Works which have not begun to yield

results wionly g¢ but y& former works aaa: that (death) being the limit.

15. But (of his) former works only those which have not begun to yield results (are destroyed by Knowledge); (for) death

458 | BRAHMA-SUTRAS | [4.1.15

is the limit (set by the scriptures for Liberation to take place).

In the last two topics it has been said that all the past works of a knower of Brahman are destroyed. Now past works are of two kinds: Sanchita (accu- mulated) i.e. those whith have not yet begun to bear fruit, and Prarabdha (commenced) i.e. those which have begun to yield results, and have produced the body through which a person has attained Knowl- edge. The opponent holds that both these are de- stroyed, because the Mundaka text cited says that all his works are destroyed. Moreover, the idea of non- agency of the knower is the same with respect to Sanchita or Prarabdha work; therefore it is reason- able that both are destroyed when Knowledge dawns.

The Sutra refutes this view and says that only the Sanchita works are destroyed by Knowledge, but not the Prarabdha, which are destroyed only by being worked out. So long as the momentum of these works lasts, the knower of Brahman has to be in the body. When they are exhausted, the body falls off, and he attains perfection. His Knowledge cannot check these works, even as an archer has no control over the arrows already discharged, which come to rest only when their momentum is exhausted. The Sruti declares this in texts like, ‘‘And for him the delay is only so long as he is not liberated (from this body); and then he is one (with Brahman)’’ (Chh. 6. 14. 2). If it were not so, then there would

4.1.16] | BRAHMA-SUTRAS 459

be no teachers of Knowledge. Therefore the Prarab- dha works are not destroyed by Knowledge.

jrom the rule mentioned in topic 10.

afaetars q acnraraa, aging 24

wfugiaife (Daily) Agnihotra ete. q but aa -w1ala contribute to the sume result as that (Knowledge) wa only aq-erat that being seen (from the scriptures).

16. But (the results of daily) Agni- hotra etc. (are not destroyed by Knowl- edge; these) contribute to the very same result as Knowledge (i.e. Liberation), because that is seen from the scriptures.

Among works some are enjoined for attaining certain results such as heaven, and there are others like the daily Agnihotra which yield no such results and yet are enjoined as a sort of discipline. The opponent holds that even these regular works (Nitya Karma) performed before the dawning of Knowledge are destroyed, even as works done with desires (Kamya Karma), for from the standpoint of the knower of Brahman his non-agency with respect to both is the same. This Sutra refutes that view and says that the regular works performed in the past are not destroyed. Works are of two kinds: those which yield specific results, and those which

help to produce Knowledge. Obligatory regular works performed before Knowledge are of this latter kind. And since Knowledge leads to Liberation, the regular works also may be said to contribute indirect- ly to that. Hence their results persist till death.

aarsearta Raya: | V9 I

wa: From this wa different wf also fe indeed uaara of some (Sakh4s) gaat: of both.

17. (There are) indeed (good works) also different from this (daily Agnihotra and the like), (with reference to which is the.statement) of some (Sakhas); (this is the view) of both (Jaimini and Badarayana).

Besides the Nitya Karma or regular works like the daily Agnihotra and the like there are other good works which are-performed with a view to certain results. It is with reference to these that the follow- ing statement of some Sakhas is made: ‘‘His sons get his inheritance—friends his good works and enemies his evil actions.’ Both Jaimini and Badardyana are of opinion that works done with a desire do not help the origination of Knowledge.

knowledge or meditations also help in the origination of Knowledge.

aaa facta fen ve 0

4.1.19] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 461

zwa_va Whatever fatiat with knowledge ¥fa thus f¥ because.

18. Because (the statement), “What- ever (he does) with knowledge,” indicates this.

Regular works (Nitya Karma) which help the origination of Knowleage are of two kinds, those combined with meditations, those unaccompanied by them. Since work combined with meditations is superior to work done without meditations, the opponent holds that the former alone helps the origination of Knowledge. This Sutra refutes it and says that in the statement, ‘‘That alone which is performed with knowledge... becomes more power- ful’? (Chh. I. 1. 10), the comparative degree shows that works done without knowledge, that is, not combined with meditations, are not altogether useless, though the other class is more powerful.

through enjoyment the knower of Brahman attains oneness with It.

witta feat aqfaen dq ty 28 0

Witt By enjoyment q but sat of the other two works aufqat having exhausted @va@ becomes one (with Brahman).

19. But having exhausted by enjoy- ment the other two works (viz. good and

evil works that have begun to bear fruit), (he) becomes one (with Brahman).

The opponent argues that even as a knower of Brahman sees diversity while living, so also even after death he will continue to see diversity; in other words, he denies that the knower of Brahman attains oneness with Brahman at death. This Sutra refutes it and says that the Prarabdha works are destroyed through fruition, and though till then the knower of Brahman has to be in the relative world as a Jivan- mukta, yet when these are exhausted by being worked out, he attains oneness with Brahman at death. He no longer sees any diversity, owing to the absence of any cause like the Prarabdha, and since all works including the Prarabdha are destroyed at death, he attains oneness with Brahman.


CHAPTER IV
----------

[Section II]

In the previous section it was spown that by the destruction of actions which have not as yet begun to yield results a knower of Brahman attains Jivan- mukti, and that on the exhaustion of the Prarabdha work he attains Videhamukti at death and becomes one with Brahman. Thus in # general way the result of Knowledge has been sei forth. The remain- ing three sections deal at length with the nature of Liberation, which is attained on the exhaustion of the Prarabdha Karma. In this particular section the path of the gods, by which the knower of the Saguna Brahman travels after death, is described. With this eud in view it begins with the exposition of the successive steps by which the soul passes out of the body at death.

the organs are merged in mind.

aipata, IaTaseaTSs I hl

ara. Speech #afa in mind zaaa_ because it is so seen We from scriptural statements 4 and.

1. Speech (is merged) in mind, be-

, 464 BRAHMA-SUTRAS

cause it 1s so seen, and there are scriptural statements (to that effect).

‘“When, my dear, the man departs from here, his speech merges in mind, mind in Prana, Prana in Fire, and Fire in the Highest Deity’? (Chh. 6. 8. 6). This text describes what happens at the time of death. It says that speech gets merged in mind, mind in Prana, and so on. Now the question is whether the organ of speech as such gets merged in mind, or only its function. The opponent holds that as there is no mention in the text about the function of speech getting merged, we have to understand that the organ itself gets merged in mind.

The Sutra refutes this view and says that only the function of the organ of speech gets merged in mind. Mind is not the material cause of the organs, and as such they cannot get merged in it. It is only in the material cause that the effects get merged, and as mind is not the material cause of the organs, we have to understand here by speech not the organ, but its function. A function of the organ, unlike the organ itself, can get merged in mind, even though it is not the cause of that function, just as the burning property of fire, which has its start in wood, becomes extinct in water. The scriptural statement therefore refers to the function of speech, the function and the thing to which it belongs being viewed as one. We also notice that a dying man first loses his function of speech, though his mind is still functioning. So we have to understand from

4.2.8]. BRAHMA-SUTRAS, 465

experience also that the function of speech, and not the organ itself, i merged in mind.

ad TT J AgTvzay i 2 tt

wa; w¢ For the same reason 4% and alfa all (organs) 84 after.

2. And for the same reason all (organs) follow (mind, i.e. get their func- tions merged 1n it).

For the same reasons as stated in Sutra 1 the functions of the remaining organs follow, i.e. get merged in mind. ‘The fire is the Udana, for they in whom the fire has been extinguished, go for rebirth with their organs absorbed in mind’’ (Pr, 8. 9). This text shows that the functions of all the organs cet merged in mind.

in Prana.

AAA: ATR, SALT tl 3 I

aq That 44: mind w@in Prana sada from the subsequent clause ( of the Sruti ).

8. That mind (is merged) in Prana, (as is seen) from the subsequent clause (of the Sruti cited).

That mind, in which the functions of the differ- ent organs get merged, in its turn gets merged in

466, BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.2.8

Prana, for the Sruti cited in Sutra 1 says, ‘‘Mind in Prana.’’ The opponent holds that here, unlike the case of the organs, it is mind itself, and not its func- tion, that gets merged in Prana, inasmuch as Prana can be said to be the material cause of mind. In support of his contention he cites the following texts: ‘“Mind consists of food, Prana of water’? (Chh. 6. 6. 5) and ‘‘Water sent forth earth’? (Chh. 6. 2. 4). When mind ‘is merged in Prana, it is the same thing as earth being merged in water, for mind is food or earth, and Prana is water. Hence the Sruti here speaks not of the function of mind, but of mind itself getting merged in Prana. The Sutra refutes this view and says that this relation of causality by an indirect process does not justify our under- standing that mind itself is merged in Prana. So here also it is the function alone that gets merged, and this is justified on the same grounds as given in Sutra 1, viz. scriptural statement and experience. We find that mind ceases to function in a dying man, even while his vital force is functioning.

gets merged in the individual soul.

asa, agararfara: i 2 I

a: That ( Prana ) WT#in the ruler ( Jiva ) a4- sByqaied: on account of ( statements expressing ) approach to that etc.

4.2.5] | BKAHMA-SUTRAS _ 467

4. That (Prana) is merged in the ruler (Jiva) on account of (statements expressing) approach to that etc.

In the text cited in Sutra 1 we have, ‘Prana (is merged) in fire.? How then can it be said that the function of Prana is merged in the individual soul, asks the opponent. The Sutra justifies its view on the ground that statements about Pranas coming to the Jiva etc. are found in scriptural texts. ‘‘All the Pranas approach the departing man at the time of death’”’ (Brih. 4. 8. 38). Also, ‘‘When it departs, the vital force follows’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 2). The text cited in Sutra 1 does not, however, contradict this view, as the following Sutra shows.

IAG, THA: US Ul

yg ln the elements ad _-g@: from the Sruti texts to that effect.

5. In the elements (is merged) (the Jiva with the Pranas), as it is seen from the Sruti.

If we understand, ‘‘Prana (is merged) in fire’’ as meaning that the Jiva with Prana is merged in fire, there is no contradiction between this Sruti text and what is said in the last Sutra. So Prana is first merged in the individual soul and then the soul with Prana takes its abode in the fine essence of the gross elements, fire etc., the seed of the future body.

atenferta, axtaet fru é a

4 Not wafer in one aaaaq: ( both ) declare so fe for.

6. (The soul with Prana is merged) not in one (element only), for both (the Sruti and Smriti) declare so.

At the time of death, when the soul leaves one body and goes in for another, it together with the subtle body, abides in the fine essence of all the gross elements and not in fire only, for all the elements are required for a future body. Vide 8. 1. 2.

to the way is common to both a knower of the Saguna Brahman and an ordinary man.

VAT MIAIHATY,, ATA ATTA | 9 tl

wat Common 4 and “% @fa-sqmHq up to the beginning of their ways ‘Wea immortality 4 and waate not having burnt ( ignorance ).

7. And common (is the mode of departure at the time of death for both the knower of the Saguna Brahman and the ignorant) up to the beginning of their ways; and the immortality (of the knower of the Saguna Brahman is only relative), not having burnt (ignorance).

For the knower of the Nirguna Brahman there is

4.2.8] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 469

no departure at ali. Leaving his case, the opponent says that the mode of departure from the body for the knower of the Saguna Brahman and the ignorant ought to be different, as they attain different abodes after death, the formcr reaching Brahmaloka and the latter being reborn in this world. This Sutra says that the knower of the Saguna Brahman enters at death the nerve Sushumné, and then goes out of the body, and takes to the path of the gods, while the ignorant enter some other nerve and go by another way to have rebirth. But till they enter on their respective ways, the method of departure at death is common to both, for it is something pertaining to this life, and like happiness and misery it is the same for both.

Supreme Deity is not absolute merging.

aaisdia:, aTAGIM

aq That “1 sala: up to the attainment of Brahman ( through Knowledge ) #arr-aqearq because ( script- ures ) declare the state of relative existence.

8. That (fine body lasts) up to the attainment of Brahman (through Know- ledge), because (the scriptures) declare the

state of relative existence (till then). In the text cited in Sutra 1 we have, ‘And fire (is merged) in the Supreme Deity’’. The opponent

argues that as fire and the other elements are merged in the Supreme Deity, whieh is the cause of these elements, this is only the final dissolution, and ‘so everyone at death attains Liberation. This Sutra says that this merging is not absolute merging, but the one we experience in deep sleep. Only the functions. of these elements are merged, and not the elements themselves. The final dissolution does not take place till Knowledge is attained; for the scriptures declare that till then the individual soul is subject to relative existence: ‘‘Some souls enter the womb to have a body”’ etc. (Kath. 2. 5. 7). If the merging at death were absolute, then there could be no rebirth.

ae qaroraya, ats: tl € It aw Subtle warwa: as regards size 4 and au so syqal: because it is experienced.

9. (This ‘fine body) is subtle (by nature) and size, because it is so experi- enced.

The body formed from the essence of the gross elements in which the soul abides at the time of death is subtle by nature and size. This is under- stood from scriptural statements which declare that it goes out along the Nadis (nerves). So it is necessarily subtle or small in size. Its transparency explains why it is not obstructed by gross bodies, or is not seen when it passes out at death.

4.2.12] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 471

TTATATA: MLO  Not syada by the destruction wa; therefore. 10. Therefore (this subtle body is) not

(destroyed) by the destruction (of the gross body).

TAT B-IATA:-OT FEAT Hl LE Il

wa va To this ( fine body ) alone 4 and vury: because of possibility ws: this aw ( bodily ) heat.

11. And to this (tine body) alone does this (bodily) heat belong, because this (only) is possible.

The bodily heat observed in living animals belongs to this subtle body and not to the gross body, for the heat is felt so long as there is life and not after that.

Brahman do not depart from the body at death.

ofatarfefa Sq, a, mrtg tt 22 tl

ufaturq On account of denial ‘fa 4q if it be said @ not so ata from the individual soul.

12. If it be said (that the Pranas of a knower of Brahman do not depart), on account of the Sruti denying it; (we say) not so, (because the scripture denies the

a BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.2.12

departure of the Pranas) from the individ- ual soul (and not frorh the body).

This Sutra gives the view of the opponent.

‘‘His Pranas do not depart’? (Brih. 4. 4. 6). This text refers to a knower of the Nirguna Brahman. It says that his Prinas do not depart at death. The opponent holds that the denial of the departure of the Pranas is from the soul and not from the body. It says that the Pranas do not depart from the soul—not that they do not depart from the body, for in the latter case there will be no death at all. This is made all the more clear from the Madhyan- dina recension, which says, ‘‘From him’’ etc. There- fore the soul of one who knows Brahman passes out of the body with the Prdanas.

eqet IHATT tl 23 tl

we; Clear fe for ww of some ( schools ).

13. For (the denial of the departure) is clear (in the texts) of some (schools).

This Sutra refutes the view of the previous one by connecting the denial to the body and not to the soul.

That the Pranas do not depart from the body is made clear from Sruti texts like, ‘ ‘Yajnavalkya’, said he, ‘When this (liberated) man dies, do his Pranas go up from him, or do they not?’ ‘No’ replied Yajnavalkya, ‘they merge in him only’ ”’ etc. (Brih. 3. 2. 11). Therefore we have to take even the

4.2.15] ERAHMA-SUTRAS 478

M&dhyandina reagrg ‘from him’ to refer to the body. It is not true that if the Pranas do not depart there will be no death, for they do not remain in the body, but get merged, which makes life impossible, and we say in common parlance that the person is dead. Moreover, if the Prinas did depart with the soul from the body, then a rebirth of such a soul would be inevitable, and consequently there would be no Liberation. So tne Prinas do not depart from the body in the case of the knower of Brahman.

WIA A I 2 Il

waa The Smriti says (so) = and.

14, And the Smriti (also) says (so).

‘‘The gods themselves are perplexed, looking for the path of him who has no path’? (Mbh. 12. 270. 22) which thus denies departure for the knower of Brahman.

Nirguna Brahman get merged in It at death.

aft GL, TUITE tl 24 Ul

alfa Those @ in the Supreme Brahman aw so fe | for we ( the scripture ) says.

15. Those (Pranas) (are merged) in the Supreme Brahman, for so (the script- ure) Says.

This Sutra describes what happens to the Pranas

(organs) and the fine essence of the gross elements in which they abide, in the case of a knower of Brahman who dies. These organs and the elements get merged in the Supreme Brahman. ‘‘The sixteen digits of this witness, the Purusha, having their goal in Him are dissolved on reaching Him’’ (Pr. 6. 5). The text, “‘All the fifteen parts of their body enter into their causes’? etc. (Mu. 3. 2. 7) gives the end from a relative standpoint, according to which the body disintegrates and goes back to its cause, the elements. The former text speaks from a transcend- ental standpoint, according to which the whole aggre- gate is merged in Brahman, even as the illusory snake is merged in the rope when knowledge dawns.

Nirguna Brahman attain absolute non- distinction with Brahman at death.

afaaret:, TIAA th LE

wfana: Non-distinction @744tq on account of the statement (of the scriptures).

16. (Absolute) non-distinction (with Brahman of the parts merged takes place) according to the statement (of the scriptures).

‘‘Their names and forms are destroyed, and

people speak of the Purusha only. Then he becomes devoid of digits and immortal’? (Pr. 6. 5). The

4.2.17] BkAHMA-SUTRAS 3475

digits get absolutely merged in the Supreme Brahman. The inerging in the case of the knower of Brahman is absolute, whereas in the case of an ordinary person it is not so; they exist in a fine potential state, the cause of future rebirth. But in the case of the knower of Brahman, Knowledge having destroyed igncrance, all these digits which are but its effects, get merged absolutely, without any chance of crupping up egain.

Brahman comes to the heart at the time of death and thence goes out through the Sushumnd.

agmiasaed acarigagre:, fara asamaqeddaartied, greta: wearfy- FAT tl LO tl

aq-aa:-wasqa7aq The illumining of the top of its ( soul’s ) abode ( the heart ) aq-warfaa-ett: with the passage illumined by this light frareaaty owing to the efficacy of knowledge aq-Ss-afa-wqqfa- ama because of the appropriateness of constant meditation of the way which is a part of that knowledge ¥ and eelaztta: being favoured by Him who resides in the heart watfaaet by the one that is beyond the hundred.

17. (When the soul of a knower of the Saguna Brahman is about to depart from

#6; BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.2.17

the body, there is) the illumining of the top of its abode (the heart); with the passage (for the exit of the soul) illumined by this light (the soul departs), being favoured by Him who resides in the heart, along that nerve which is beyond the hundred (i.e. the hundred and first nerve or the Sushumna) owing to the efficacy of the knowledge and the appropriateness of his constant meditation on the way which is a part of that knowledge.

This Sutra describes the exit from the body of a knower of the Saguna Brahman. It has already been stated in Sutra 7 that till the soul’s entering on the path, the mode of departure of a knower of the Saguna Brahman and an ignorant man is the same. The Brihadéranyaka text describing the death of a person says, ‘‘When this self becomes weak and senseless, as it were, the organs come to it... it comes to the heart’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 1); again, ‘‘The top of the heart brightens. Through that brightened top the self departs, either through the eye, or through the head, or through any other part of the body”’ (Brih. 4. 4. 2). These texts show that at the time of death the soul together with the organs comes to the heart. At that moment the departing soul, on account of its past works, has a peculiar conscious- ness picturing to it its next life, and goes to the body which is revealed by that consciousness. This

4.2.18] BRAiIMA-SUTRAS ant

is what is referred to as the illumining of the top of the heart. With this particular consciousness the soul goes out, along one of the nerves that issue from the heart, to the eyes, or ears, or the skull, or other parts of the body, which it finally leaves through that particular exit. The question now is whether this departure is the same for a knower of the Saguna Brahman and an ordinary man. This Sutra says that though the iNlumining of the top of the heart is common to both, yet the knower of the Saguna Brahman, througn the grace of the Lord who abides in the heart, departs through the skull only, while others depart through other parts. This is consistent with his knowledge and _ constant meditation on the way out through the hundred and first nerve, the Sushumnaé. The following text elucidates it: ‘There are a hundred and one nerves of the heart; one of them penetrates the head; going up along that, one attains Immortality; the others serving for departure in various directions’? (Chh.

Brahman follows the rays of the sum after death and goes to Brahmaloka.

TATA Il Le tl ufsa-a7atet Following the rays.

18. (The soul of a knower of the

Saguna Brahman when he dies) follows the rays (of the sun).

#8 BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.2.18

In the Chhandogya Upanishad we have, ‘‘... so do these rays of the sun go to both the worlds, this as well as the other. They proceed from the sun and enter into these nerves’? (8. 6. 2); again, ‘When he thus departs from this body, then along these very rays he proceeds upwards’’ etc. (8. 6. 5). In these texts we learn that the soul of the knower of the Saguna Brahman, after departing from the body along the Sushumna, follows the rays of the sun. A doubt arises whether the soul of one who passes away in the night also follows the rays. The Sutra says that the soul, whether it departs in the night or during the day, follows the rays.

fafa a efa aa, a, darren arageanfacara, axiafa @ i 28 I

fafa In the night@ not sfa @qif it be said 4 not are wWaq-ee-wifaar because the connection con- tinues as long as the body lasts e#afa ( the Sruti ) declares 4 also.

19. If it be said (that the soul does) not (follow the rays) in the night, (we say) not so, because the connection (of the nerves and the rays) continues as long as the body lasts; (the Sruti) also declares (this).

The text quoted in the last Sutra, Chh. 8. 6. 2, shows that the connection between the rays and the

Ai,2.20] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 479

nerves lasts as long as the body lasts. So it is im- material whethet the soul passes out by day or by night. Mcreover, the sun’s rays continue even dur- ing the night, though we do not feel their presence owing tuo the fact that at night their number is limited. The Sruti also says, “‘Even by night the sun sheds his rays.’? The result of knowledge cannot be made to depend on the accident of death by day or night..

Brahman gves to Brahmaloka even if he should die during the suuthern course of the sun.

AATAVIAS(G TferTt | Ro

wa: For the same reason 4 and Wi@ during the sun’s curse Wf even efaa southern.

20. And for the same reason (the soul follows the rays) even during the sun’s southern course.

An objection is raised by the opponent that the soul of the knower of Brahman who passes away during the southern course of the sun does not follow the rays to Brahmaloka, as both the Sruti and Smriti say that only one who dies during the northern course of the sun goes there. Moreover, it is also written that.,Bhishma waited for the northern course of the sun to leave the body. This Sutra says that for the same reason as mentioned in the last Sutra,

i.e. the unreasonableness of making the result of knowledge depend on the accident of death happen-. ing at a particular time, the knower of the Saguna Brahman goes to Brahmaloka even if he should die: during the southern course of the sun. In the text, ‘Those who know thus... go to light, from light to day, from day to the bright half of the month, and from that to the six months of the northern course of the sun’’ (Chh. 5, 10. 1), the points in the northern course of the sun do not refer to any di- vision of time but to deities as will be shown under 4. 8.4. Bhishma’s waiting, however, was for uphold- ing approved custom and for showing that on account of his father’s boon he could die at will.

atfira: fa & aaa, Bra Ba i Ve tt

afar: nf With respect to the Yogis 4 and at the Smriti declares and belonging to the class of Smritis 4 and wa these two.

21. And (these times) the Smriti declares with respect to the Yogis; and these two (Yoga and Sankhya according to which they practise Sadhana) are classed as Smritis (and not Srutis).

In the Gité we have passages which declare that persons who die during the day etc. do not return any more to this mortal world. Vide Gita 8. 28, 24. On the strength of these texts, the opponent says: that the decision of the previous Sutra cannot be

4.2.21] BRAHMA-SUSRAS 481

correct. This Sutra refutes that objection saying that these detaits as to time mentioned in the Gita apply only to Yogis who practise Sadhana according to Yoga and Sankhya systems; and these two are Smritis, not Srutis. Hence the limitations as to time mentioned in them do not apply to those who

meditate on the Sagunx Brahman according to the Sruti texts.


CHAPTER IV
----------

[Section III]

In the last section the departure of the soul of a knower of the Saguna Brahman by the path of the gods has been described. This section deals with the path itself.

with that of the flame is the only path to Brahmaloka.

aifarcrfear, aemfera: 1 2

wfa:-wifeat! (On the path connected with deities) beginning with that of the flame aq-ufud: that being well known (from the Sruti).

1. (On the path connected with deities) beginning with that of the flame {the soul of the knower of the Saguna Brahman travels to Brahmaloka after death), that being well known (from the Sruti).

In the last section it was stated that the knower of the Saguna Brahman travels by Devayana or the path of the gods to Brahmaloka. About this path itself different texts make different declarations. The Chhandogya and the Brihadaranyaka say that the

4.8.1] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 483

departed soul of sucha persor reaches first the deity identified with the flame. Vide Chh. 5. 10. 1 and Brih. 6. 2. 15. The Brihadéranyaka in connection with another Vidyé says that it reaches the air. Vide Brih. 5. 10. 1. The Kaushitaki Upanishad says that it reaches the world of fire. Vide Kau. 1. 3. The Munaaka says that it traveis by the path of the sun. Vide Mu. 1. 2 11. The question is whether these texts refer to different paths or are different deseriptions of the same path, the path of the gods. The opponent holds that these texts refer to different paths to Braimaloka. The Sutra refutes this view and says that all the texts refer to and give only different particulars of the same path, the path con- nected with deities beginning with that identified with the flame. Why? On account of its being well known from the Sruti texts that this is the path for all knowers vf Brahman. ‘‘Those who know this (Panchéaym Vidya) and those who in the forest meditate with faith and penance, reach the deity identified with flame’’ etc. (Chh. 5. 10. 1) shows that this path connected with deities beginning with that of the flame belongs to all knowers of Brahman what- ever be the Vidya through which they have attained that knowledge. Moreover, the goal attained, viz. Brahmaloka, being the same in all cases, and there being no justification for regarding the path as different on account of their being treated in different chapters, since some part of the path is recognized mn all texts, we have to conclude that all the texts

48A, BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.3.3

refer to the same path, but give different particulars, which have all to be combined for a full description of the path.

of the year and then the deity of the air.

ayaa, sfearataararereanyz tt > A

aqyq The deity of the air wera from the deity of the year “faxe-fatura on account of the absence and presence of specification.

2. (The departed soul of a knower of the Saguna Brahman goes) from the deity of the year to the deity of the air, on ac- count of the absence and presence of specification.

In the last Sutra it was stated that the different. texts give different particulars or stages of the same path. This Sutra fixes the order of the stages. The Kaushitaki describes the path as follows: ‘‘The Upasaka, having reached the path of the gods, reaches the world of Agmi (fire), of Vayu (air), of Varuna, of Indra, of Prajapati, and then of Brahman” (Kau. 1. 8). Again the Chhandogya Upanishad describes the path as follows: ‘They reach the deity identified with the flame, from him to the deity of the day, from him to the deity of the bright half of the month, from him to the deities identified with the six months of the northern path of the sun, from them to the deity of the year,

4.3.2] ERAHMA-SUTRAS 485

from him to the deity: of the sun, from him to the deity of the mov, from him to the deity of lightn-

In these two texts the first deity they reach is said to be the deity of the flame or fire. So the starting point is clearly pointed out by both texts, for they say that having reached the path of the gods the departed souls reach this deity. Com- bining these two texts we have to place the deity of air in between the deity of ihe year and the deity of the sun. Why? Hecause of the absence and presence of specification. ‘‘When a man departs from this world, he reaches the (deity identified with) air, which makes an opening for him... He goes upwards through that and reaches the (deity of the) sun” (Brih. 5. 10. 1). This text fixes that air cones immediately before the sun because we perceive a regular order of succession. But as regards air coming after the deity of the flame there is no specification, but simply a statement; “He comes from the world of fire to that of air.”’ In between these two stages we have several other stages which the Chhandogya text mentions. Again in the text, ‘‘From the deities identified with the six months in which the sun travels northward he reaches the deity identified with the world of the gods’? (Brih. 6. 2. 15). To keep the immediate sequence of the deity identifiec with air and that identified with the sun, we must understand that the soul passes from the deity of the world of the gods to the deity of the

air. Again in the texts of the Chhandogya and the Brihadaéranyaka, the deity of the world of the gods is not mentioned in the former and the deity of the year in the latter. Both have to be included in the full description of the path, and since the year is connected with the months, the deity of the year precedes the deity of the world of the gods.

lightning the soul reaches the world of Varuna.

afsatsfa qem:, danza tl 3 tl

afeaisfa After the deity of lightning aau; (comes) Varuna ( rain-god ) aq on account of the connec-

tion.

3. After (reaching) the deity of lightning (the soul reaches) Varuna, on account of the connection (between the two).

The Chhandogya text reads, ‘‘From the sun to the moon, from moon to lightning.’’ The Kaushitaki text reads, ‘‘From Vayu to Varuna.’’ Combining these two texts we have to place Varuna after lightning, on account of the connection between the two. Varuna is the god of rain, and lightning precedes rain. So after lightning comes Varuna. And after Varuna come Indra and Prajapati, for there is no other place for them, and the Kaushitaki text also puts them there.

4.8.4] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 487

So the comvicte enumeration of the stages of the path of the gods is as follows: First the deity cf the flame or fire, then the deity of the day, the deity of the bright half of the month, the deities of the six months when the sun travels to the north, the deity of the year, the deity of the world of gods, the deity of the air, the sun, the moon, the deity of lightning, the world or Varuna, the world of Indra, tlhe world of Prajipati, and finally Brahmaluka.

describing the path of the gods mear deities idcntified uith the flame etc., which conduct the soul stage after stage till Brahmaloka is reached.

aifaaticant:, afegta 8 i

wifaaifeat; (These are) deities conducting the soul aq-fasty on account of indicatory marks of that.

4. (These are) deities conducting the soul (on the path of the gods), on account of indicatory marks to that effect.

In the texts cited in the previous Sutras, flame, bright half of the month, year, etc. are the deities identified with these, which receive the departed soul and conduct it on its way to Brahmaloka. That deities are,meant here, and not marks or places of enjoyment, is indicated by the text of the Chhandogya, which ends thus: ‘From the moon to

the lightning. Then a being who is not a man leads them to Brahman’’ (Chh. 4. 15. 5; 5. 10. 1). This text shows that unlike the previous guides who were more or less human, this particular guide is not human in nature.

SATEATAT ATA CAS Ul & Il Buq-Aalsiy From the benumbed state of both aq-fag: that is established.

5. (That deities are meant in those texts) is established, because both (i.e. the traveller and the path) are benumbed (1.e. unconscious).

The departed souls, because their organs ete. are withdrawn into the mind, are incapable of guid- ing themselves. And the flame etc. being without intelligence cannot guide the souls. Hence it is proved that intelligent deities identified with the flame etc. guide the souls to Brahmaloka. Moreover, as the organs of the departed souls are withdrawn into the mind, they cannot enjoy, and so flame and the rest cannot be worlds where they enjoy.

aa A aad Fa:, THA UE agi@a_ By (the superhuman ) guide connected

with lightning Ya alone aa: from thence 44-42: that being known from the Sruti.

6. From thence (the souls ‘are guided) by the very same (superhuman)

4.8.7] BL AHMA-SUTRAS 489

person who comes to lightning, that being known from the Sruti.

After they have reached the deity identified with lightning, they are led by that very superhuman person who takes charge of them from the deity of lightning to Brahmuloka through the worlds of Varuna, Indra, and Prajdpati. This is known from others do not avtually guide the soul like the earlier guides, since the superhuman person guides them all through after lightuing up to Brahmaloka. They only favour the souls either by not obstructing or helping them in some way.

Therefore it is established that by flame ete. deities are meant.

Toric 5: The Brahman to which the departed souls go by the path of the gods is the Saguna Brahman,

HIT ASAT:, ACT WETTTA: Il O Il

a#wq The relative (Brahman) @eft: Badari we its afa-sqqq:; on account of the possibility of being the goal.

7. The relative (Brahman) (is attain- ed by the soul going by the path of the gods), (so says) Badari, on account of the possibility of its being the goal (of a journey).

In the previous Sutra the way was discussed.

490 RRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.3.7

Now from this Sutra onwards the discussion is about the goal reached. The Chhandogya text quoted in connection with the way, says, ‘“‘Then a being who is not a man leads them to Brahman’’ (Chh. 5. 10. 1). The question is whether this Brahman is the Saguna Brahman or the Supreme Brahman. Badari says it is the Saguna Brahman, for such a journey is pos- sible only with respect to the Saguna Brahman, which is finite and therefore occupies a particular place to which the souls may go. But it is not possible with respect to the Nirguna Brahman, which is all- pervading.

faaifaacars tt ¢ tl

faafeaenay On account of the qualification 4 and.

8. And on account of the qualifica- tion (with respect to this Brahman in another text).

‘‘And conducts them to the worlds of Brahman”’ (Brih. 6. 2. 15). The plural number is not possible with respect to the Supreme Brahman, while it is possible in the case of the Saguna Brahman, which may abide in different conditions.

ATA | ARATSM: WE Il

wate On account of the nearness 9 but a4 amen: (its) designation as that.

9. But on account of the nearness (of the Saguna Brahman to the Supreme

4.8.10] BRaHMA-SUTRAS 49}.

Brahman, it is) designated as_ that (Supreme Biahmoan).

‘But’ sets aside any doubt that may arise on account of the word ‘Brahman’ being used for the Saguna Brahman in the Chhandoyya text. This designation, the Sutra says, is because of the near- ness of the Saguna Brahman to the Supreme Brahman.

Tas aes Bara: TU, ahrararas not

ara-waq On the dissolution of the Brahmaloka aq-TAAY BE along with the ruler of that world (i.e. Saguna Brahman) Wa: 94 higher than that (i.e. the Supreme Brahmar) ‘fianq-on account of the de- claration of the Sruti.

19, On the dissolution of the Brah- maloka (the souls attain), along with the ruler of that world, what is higher than that (i.e. the Supreme Brahman), on account of the declaration of the Sruti.

If the souls going by the path of the gods reach the Saguna Brahman, then how can a statement like ‘They no more return to this world”? (Brih. 6. 2. 15) be made with respect to them, as there can be no permanency anywhere apart from the Supreme Brah- man? This Sutra explains it saying that at the dissolution e«f the Brahmaloka the souls, which by that time have attained Knowledge, along with the Saguna Brahman attain what is higher than the

Saguna Brahman, i.e. the Supreme Brahman. So the Sruti texts declare.

WIATS i LE tt

qa: On account of the Smriti 4 and.

11. And on account of the Smriti {texts supporting this view).

at sfafa:, qeacara i 22

wa: The Supreme (Brahman) afafa: ( so says) Jaimini Far on account of that being the primary meaning (of the word ‘Brahman’),

12. The Supreme (Brahman) (is attained by the souls going by the path of the gods), (so says) Jaimini, on account of that being the primary meaning (of the word ‘Brahman’).

Sutras 12-14 give a prima facie view of the matter.

Jaimini thinks that the word ‘Brahman’ in the Chhandogya text refers to the Supreme Brahman, as that is the primary meaning of the word.

SRA tl 23 I enatq_ On account of the Sruti texts 4 and. 18. And because the Sruti declares that.

“Going upwards by that he reaches immortality”

4.3.14] BRKAHMA-SUTRAS 493.

(Chh. 8. 6. 6; Kath. 2. 6. 16). This text says that the soul which passes »ut of the body by the nerve Sushumné reaches immortality, und this can be attainect only in the Supreme Brahman.

aa ara sfaqeafiafea: i 29 tl 4 Not 4 and #1 in the Saguna Brahman sfaufa- wiaafy: the desire to attain Brahman.

14. And the desire to attain Brahman (which an Upasaka has at the time of death can) not (be with respect to) the Saguna Brahman.

“I come to the assembly-house of Prajapati’’ (Chh. 8. 14. 1). This desire to attain ‘the house” cannot be with respect tu the Saguna Brahman, but is appropriate only with respect to the Supreme Brahman. For the text quoted says earlier, ‘‘And that within which these (names and forms) are contained is Brihman,’’ where the Supreme Brahman 1s referred to.

Sutras 12-14 give the opponent’s view against. what has been said in Sutras 7-11. The arguments of Sutras 12-14 are refuted thus: The Brahman attained by those who go by the path of the gods caunot be the Supreme Brahman. They attain only the Saguna Brahman. The Supreme Brahman is all-pervading, the Inner Self of all. Such a Brahman cannot be atta.ned, for It is the Self of everyone. Journey or attainment is possible only where there is difference, where the attainer is different from the

thing attained. What is called realization of the Supreme Brahman is nothing but the removal of ignorance about It. In such a realization there is no going or attaining. When the ignorance is removed Brahman manifests Itself. But the attain- ment of Brahman spoken of in the texts connected with the path of the gods is not merely the removal of ignorance but actual. Such an attainment is not possible with respect to the Supreme Brahman. Again the passage, ‘‘I enter the assembly-house of Prajapati,’’ etc., can be separated from what precedes and be connected with the Saguna Brahman. The fact that Chh. 8. 14. 1 says, ‘I am the glory of the Brahmanas, of the kings’? cannot make it refer to the Nirguna Brahman, for the Saguna Brahman can also be said to be the Self of all, as we find in texts like, ‘He to whom all works, all desires belong”’ etc. (Chh. 8. 14. 2). The reference to the journey to Brahman, which belongs to the sphere of relative knowledge, in a chapter which deals with Supreme Knowledge is only by way of glorification of the latter. Therefore the view expressed in Sutras 7-11 by Badari is the correct one.

the Saguna Brahman without a symbol attain Brahmaloka.

WMIAHSAATATA a MATIAT:, TwTAT- STUNG, TERATS th RU

wudta-sraeaat4 Those who do not use a symbol

4.8.15] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 495

(of Brahman) in their meditations #afa (the super- human being) leads sfx 7etW: so says Badardyana suaat if this distinction is made Weiaq there being no contradiction a4-mq: as is the meditation on that (so does one become) @ and.

15. Badaradyana says that (the superhuman being), leads (to Brahmaioka only) those whe do not use a symbol (of Bralsman) in their meditations, there being no contradiction if this distinction is made, and (it being construed by the principle) as is the meditation on that (so does one become).

The question is raised whether all worshippers of the Saguna Brahman go to Brahmaloka, being led by the superhuman being mentioned in Chh. 4. 15. 5. The opponent holds that they do, according to 8. 3. 81 ante, where it is expressly stated that all, whatever be their Vidya, go to Brahmaloka. This Sutra says that only those worshippers of the Saguna Brahman who do not use any symbol of Brahman in their meditation go there. This, however, does not con- tradict what is said in 8. 8, 81 if we understand that by ‘all’? are meant all those worshippers who do not take the help of any symbol. Moreover, this view is justified by the Sruti and Smriti declarations which say, “‘In whatever form they meditate on Him, that they become.’’ In the worship of the symbols the meditations are not fixed on Brahman, the symbols

being the chief thing in them, and so the worshipper does not attain Brahmaloka. But the case of one who worships the five fires is different, as there is a direct scriptural statement saying that he goes to Brahmaloka. Where there is no such direct scrip- tural statement, we have to hold that only those whose object of meditation is Brahman, go to Brahma- loka, not others.

fasta a axrafa i 2& fait Difference 4 and exafa the scripture declares.

16. And the scripture declares a difference (with respect to meditations on symbols).

“One who meditates upon name as Brahman becomes independent so far as name reaches’? (Chh.. 7. 1. 5); ‘One who meditates upon speech as Brahman becomes independent so far as speech reaches’? (Chh. 7. 2. 2). In these texts the Sruti tells of different results aecording to the difference in the symbols. This is possible because the meditations depend on symbols, while there could be no such difference in results if they depended on the one non-different Brahman. Hence it is clear that those who use symbols for their meditations cannot go to Brahma- loka like those who meditate on the Saguna Brahman.

CHAPTEP. IV

[Section IV]

In tne last section the attainment of Brahmaloka by the worshippers cf the Saguna Brahman has been dealt with. This section deals with the realization of the Supreme Brahman by Its worshippers.

Tomc 1: The released soul does not acquire anything new but oniy manifests its true nature.

aoaifaaia:, CPAs tl 2 Ul

aq Having attained wfauta: there is manifesta- tion (uf its real nature ) @aeIq from the word

‘own’.

1. (When the Jiva) has attained (the highest light) there is manifestation (of its real nature), as we know from the word

‘own’.

‘‘Now this serene and happy being, after having risen from this body, and having attained the highest light, reaches its own true form’’ (Chh. 8. 8. 4). The opponent explains this text as follows: The individ- ual soul which has got rid of its identification with the three bodies, viz. gross, subtle, and causal, after attaining Brahman exists in the state of Liberation.

This Liberation was not a pre-existent thing, but something that is newly acquired like heaven, as the word ‘reaches’ in the text clearly shows. Therefore Liberation is something new that is acquired by the Jiva. The Sutra refutes this view and says that the word ‘own’ shows that Liberation was a pre-existent thing. The Jiva manifests its own nature, i.e. its real nature, which was so long covered with ignorance. This is its attainment of Liberation. It is nothing that is newly acquired.

WH:, WaAAaTs Nz i am: Released ufasiama from the premise.

2. (The Self which manifests Its true nature attains) Liberation, (as 1s known), from the premise (made in the scriptures).

If Liberation is nothing new that is acquired by the Jiva, then what is its difference from bondage? The Jiva in the state of bondage was subject to the three states of wakefulness, dream, and deep sleep, and was experiencing happiness and misery, imagining itself to be finite. On being freed from all these misconceptions it realizes its true nature, which is Absolute Bliss. This removal of all misconceptions is what is known as Liberation. Between these two states there is a world of difference. How is it known that in this state the Jiva is liberated? From the premise made in the scriptures--says the Sutra. ‘‘I will explain It to

4.4.4] BEAHMA-SUTRAS 499

here the Sruti proposes to expound that Self which is free from ail imperfections, and it begins thus: ““The being without the body is not touched by pleasure and pain’? (Chh. 8 12. 1) and concludes, ““Thus does this serene being rising above its body and having redched the highest light, appear in its cwn truc nature’? (Chn. 8. 12. 3).

ATCA, THT WB

wat The Supreme Self avg on account of the. context.

3. (The ‘light’ attained by the Jiva is) the Supreme Self; on account of the context.

The ‘Light’ attained by the Jiva which is referred to in the Chh. 8. 3. 4 is the Supreme Self, and not any physical light, for the Self is the subject- matter which is introduced thus: ‘“‘The Self which is free from evil, undecaying,”’ etc. (Chh, 8. 7. 1). The word ‘light’ is also used to denote the Self in texts like, ‘Upon that immortal Light of all lights the gods meditate as longevity’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 16).

with Brahman is one of non-separation.

afqaria, g8caTa tl 2 tl

wfaita As inseparable €8aIq for it is so seen from the scriptures.

4. (The Jiva in the state of Libera- tion exists) as inseparable (from Brah- man), for it is so seen from the scriptures.

The question is raised whether the Jiva in the state of Liberation exists as different from Brahman or as one with, and inseparable from, It. The Sutra says that it exists as inseparable from Brahman, for the scriptures say so. ‘“That you art’? (Chh. but Brahman, he is merged in Brahman’’ (Brih. 4. 4. 6)—all these texts declare that the released soul is identical with Brahman. Passages which speak of difference have to be explained in a Beconaaty. sense as expressing unity.

attained the Nirguna Brahman.

sao sifafa:, sqerrarfaes: i 0 araqa As possessed of the attributes of Brahman

afafa: (so says) Jaimini sarees: on account of the reference etc.

5. (The liberated soul exists) as possessed of the attributes of Brahman; (so says) Jaimini, on account of the refer- ence etc.

It has been said that the liberated soul attains Brahman. But Brahman has two aspects; one the unconditioned aspect as Pure Intelligence and

4.4.6] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 501

Knowledge; the other as described in the Chhandogya 8. 7. 1, “The Self which is free from evil, undecaying, undying, free from sorrow, hunger and thirst, with true desires and volition’’ etc. The question is, which aspeet doe» the liberated soul attain? Jaimini says that it is the conditioned aspect. Why? On account of the reference to the ruture of the Self as being such in the text cited. ‘Etc.’ includes Vidhi and Vyapadesa. The Vidhi or injunction referred to is, ““That is to be sought after,”> which the same Chhandogya text enjoins later on, and Vyapadesa or assertion is the mention of the qualities of omniscience and omnipotence in the same text—‘‘Obtains all worlds and all desires.”’ On these grounds Jaimini thinks that the liberated soul ettains the conditioned aspect of Brahman.

fafaaeman, agrenacarfaealgetfz: ty & tt

fafa-aata aq Solely as Pure Intelligence aq-maaay that being its true nature va thus Wsealfa; Audulomi (thinks).

6. (The liberated soul exists) solely as Pure Intelligence, that being its true nature; thus Audulomi (thinks).

This Sutra gives another view about the liberated state, whith is that of the sage Audulomi. The soul being solely of the nature of Pure Intelligence, it exists as such in the liberated state. Qualities like

being free from sin and omniscience are fanciful, and mean only the absence of sin etc.

OTACT TATA FRAT ATA: UO

vaq Thus wit even sqreq on account of refer- ence Yaalaq the former qualities existing way there is no contradiction "ewe: (so says) Badara- yana.

7. Even if it be so (ze. if the liberated soul exists gs Pure Intelligence), on ac- count of formher qualities existing owing to reference (we can accept them from the relative standpoint, for) there is no con- tradiction (between the two); (so thinks) Badarayana.

Even though from the absolute standpoint the nature of the liberated soul is Pure Intelligence, yet from the relative standpoint qualities referred to by Jaimini can be accepted, as this does not contradict Audulomi’s view. The released soul never thinks of itself as omniscient, omnipotent, etc., but exists as Pure Intelligence. But from our relative standpoint we can say of such a released soul as being omnis- cient etc., because Pure Intelligence is beyond our conception. The two views describe the liberated soul from two different standpoints, and so there is no contradiction between the two. So says Badarayana.

4.4.9] BRAHMA-SUTRAS | 508

Brahman effects its desires by mere will.

AHEUST FJ, ASS_A: <I

aaa Through wilf w only & but aq-qa: on account of the scriptures saying that.

8. But throvgh mere will (the re- leased souls attain their purpose), for the scriptures say so.

The question of those who attain Brahmaloka through the worship of the Saguna Brahman by means of Vidyas like the Dahera Vidya is taken up for discussion in this Sutra. In this Vidya it is said, “If he be desirous of the world of the fathers, by his mere will they come to him’? (Chh, 8. 2. 1). The question is whether will alone suffices to get the result, or a further operative cause is necessary. This Sutra says that by mere will the result comes, for the Sruti so declares. The will of the released is different frora our will, and has the power of producing results without any operative cause.

aq wy aracarfaata: Ws tt

wa aq For the very reasun 4 and waaifyafa: he is without a lord. 9. And for this very reason the released scul is without a lord. A liberated soul is master of himself. ‘‘For them there is freedom in all worlds’? (Chh. 8. 1. 6).

504 _BRAHMA-SUTRAS [4.4.10

Brahmaloka can exist with or without a body according to its liking.

ania arafe:, ae a aT tl Lo tl

wura Absence (of body and organs) weft: Badari (considers ) we (the Sruti) says fe because 444 thus.

10. There is absence (of body and organs, in the case of the released souls) (considers) Badari, because (the scripture) says thus.

In the previous Sutra it was told that if one attains Brahmaloka, by his mere wish things come to pass. This shows that that soul possesses a mind. The question naturally arises whether it possesses a body and the organs. Badari says that it does not, for the scripture says so. ‘‘And it is by means of this divine eye of the mind that he sees the desires and rejoices’? (Chh. 8. 12. 5), which shows that it possesses only the mind and not the organs etc.

ara afaft:, fecal 22

wa Existence afafa: Jaimini faae-maaaq because the scripture declares (the capacity to assume } diverse forms.

11. (The released soul) possesses (a body and the organs), considers Jaimin1, because the scriptures declare (the capac-

4.4.18] BRAHMA-SU'FRAS 505

ity on the part of such a sou! to assume) diverse forms.

He being one becomes three, five, seven, nine’’

(Chh. 7. 26. 2). This text says that a released soul can assume more than one form, which shows that it possesses besides the mind, a body and the organs. This is the view of Jaimini.

STAM CASA ASTTATNTSa: tt V2 tt

eiemieaq Like the twelve days’ sacrifice swafaq’ (is) of both kinds weagw: Badarayana wa: from this.

12. From this Badarayana (surmises) (that the released soul is) of both kinds, like the twelve days’ sacrifice.

From the twofold declaration of the scriptures Badardyana thinks that a released soul which has attained Brahimaioka can exist both ways—with or without a body according to its liking. It is like the twelve days’ sacrifice, which is called a Sattra as well as a Ahina sacrifice.

amas Aeaaq, FAT: tt 23 Ul aqwmna In the absence of a body #844 as in

dreams (which stand midway between waking and deep sleep) SwaW: this being reasonable.

13. In the absence of a body (the

fulfilment of desires is possible) as in dreams, since this is reasonable.

WTS AACA tl Vs Il

wa When the body exists saq-4q as in the waking state.

14. When the body exists (the fulfil- ment of desires is) as in the waking state.

Saguna Brahman can animate several bodies at the same time.

sarqaaran:, aa fe aaa n 2% tt

yerqaq Like a flame 4: animating aa so fe because @xgfa the scripture shows.

15. (The released soul’s) animating (different bodies) is like that of a flame, because so the scripture shows.

In Sutra 11 it was stated that a liberated soul can assume many bodies at the same time for enjoyment. The opponent holds that this is useless, as enjoyment is possible only in that body in which the soul and mind exist, while other bodies are life- less puppets, since the soul and mind, which cannot be divided, cannot exist in more than one body. The Sutra refutes this view and says that the other bodies are not lifeless puppets, for a released soul can, on account of its power, animate all these bodies, just as the flame of a lamp can enter into different wicks lighted from it. The soul through its powers creates bodies with interna] organs corresponding to

4.4.16] PRAHMA-SUTEAS po7

the criginal inteznal organ, and beirg limited by these, divides itsclf as many. Hence all the created bodies have a soul, which makes enjoyment through all of these possible. This we get from the Scriptures.

ereayqaqenteaaaay, arfaond fe y 26 0

waza, Of deep silcep and absulute wnion (with Brahman) @#@at-3aeH having in view either of these two “fasaq this is made ciear (by the Sruti) fe for.

16. (The declaration of absence of all cognition is made) having in view either of the two states, viz. deep sleep and absolute union (with Brahman), for this is made clear (by the scriptures).

“What should one know and through what’’ (Brih. 2. 4. 14); ‘But there is not that second thing separate from it which it can know’’ (Ibid. 4. 3, 80); ‘It becomes like water, one, the witness, and without a second’? (Ibid. 4. 8. 82). These texts deny cognition to a released soul; so how is it possible for a released soul to assume several bodies and enjoy—says the opponent. This Sutra says that these texts refer either to the state of deep sleep or to that of Liberation, in which the soul attains absolute union with the Nirguna Brahman, as is made clear by the scriptures from the context in each case. But what we have been discussing in the

t

previous Sutras is the case of one who has attained not absolute union with Brahman, but only Brahmaloka. This state is quite different from the other two states, and as such, cognition is possible in it, there being diversity, as also enjoyment, even. as in heaven, the difference being that from Brahmaloka one does not return to this earth, whereas from heaven one returns to this mortal world after the exhaustion of the virtue which raised him to the status of a god.

Brahmaloka has all the lordly powers except the power of creation etc.

AICUGAAL, THUG, safafeacars ti 29 Ml

maeanNany Except the power of creation etc. WaTUG on account of (Iswara being ) the subject- matter Sefafeaai on account of (released souls) not being mentioned @ and.

17. (The released soul attains all lordly powers) except the power of crea- tion etc., on account of (Iswara being) the subject-matter (of all texts where creation etc. are described), and (the released souls) not being mentioned (in that connection).

The question is raised whether those who by worshipping the qualified Brahman attain Brahma-

4.4.18] BRAHMA-SUTRAS 509

loka and lordly powers, have limited or unlimited powers. The cppunent holds that it should be uulimited, because of the scriptural texts, “They can roam at will in all the worlds’? (Chh. 7. 25. 2, 8. 1. 6); “To him all the gods offer worship’’ (Taitt. 1. 5). This Sutra says that the released souls attain lordly powers without. the power of creating, preserving, and destroying the universe. Burring this powers tney get all other powers. Whyr Because Iswara is the subject-matter of all the texts dealing with creation etc., while the liberated souls are not mentioned at all in this connection. Moreover, this would lead to many Iswaras, which may give rise to a conflict of wills with respect to creation etc. Therefore the powers of the liberated souls are not absolute but limited, and are dependent on the will of Iswara.

setqemfafaaa, a, afsarfieinveccats: ec

yae-suemq On account of direct teaching sfa 3q if it be said 4 not wfaaiftaaweaq-sa: because the scripture declares (that the soul attains Him) who entrusts the sun etc. (with their offices) and resides in those spheres.

18. If it be said (that the released soul attains absolute powers) on account of direct teaching (of the scriptures), (we say) no, for the scriptures declare (that the released soul attains Him) who entrusts

the sun etc. (with their offices) and resides in those spheres.

He becomes the lord of himself’? (Taitt. 1. 6).

From the direct teaching of the Sruti the opponent holds that the released soul attains absolute powers. The Sutra says that his powers depend on the Lord, for the text cited further on says, ‘‘He attains the Lord of the mind’’, the Lord who abides in spheres like the sun etc. and entrusts the sun etc. with offices. Therefore from this latter part of the text it is clear that the released soul gets its powers from the Lord and depends on Him. Hence its powers are not unlimited.

faarcafa a aa fef erfaara ute i

faar-waff Which is beyond all effected things 4 and aa so fe because fefaq existence “8 the script- ure declares.

19. And (there is a form of the Supreme Lord) which is beyond all created things, because so the scripture declares (His) existence (in a twofold form).

Such is the greatness of it; greater than it is

the Purusha. One foot of His is all beings. His (other) three feet are what is immortal in heaven’”’ (Chh. 3. 12. 6). This’ text declares that the Supreme Lord abides in two forms, the transcendental and the relative. Now he who worships the Lord in His relative aspect does not attain the transcendental

4.4.21] BELAHMA-SUTRAS 511

aspect, for the Sruti says, ‘‘As one meditates upon That, so one necomes.”? Similarly, since the wor- shipper is not able to comprehend the relative aspect of the Lord in full, as possessed of infinite attributes and powers, but is ab'e to comprehend Him only partially, he attains only limited powers, and not unlimited powers like the Lord Hiinself.

SUA AAATATA tl Ro A

awaa: (The two) show 4 end 2aq thus yere-wqala perception and infcrerce.

20. And thus perception and infer- ence show.

This Sutra says that the transcendental aspect of the Lord is established by both the Sruti and Smriti. That form which the previous Sutra cited merely as an example, this Sutra establishes on the authority of the Sruti and Smriti. ‘There the sun shines not, nox the moon, nor stars’? etc. (Mu. 2. 2. 10); “‘That the sun illumines not, nor the moon, nor the fire’’ etc. (Gita 15. 6).

wT AATTASSTSA | XE I

Wawa aa-faria Because cf indications of equal- ity with respect to enjoyment only 4 and.

21. And because of the indications (in the scriptures) of equality (of the released soul with the Lord) only with respect to enjoyment.

"That the powers of the released soul are not unlimited is also known from the indications in the Sruti that the equality of these souls with the Lord is only with respect to enjoyment, and not with respect to creation etc. ‘‘As al] beings take care of this Deity, so do they take care of him’ (Brih. 1. 5. 20); ‘Through it he attains identity with this Deity, or lives in the same world with it’? (Brih. 1. 5. 28). All these texts describe equality only with respect to enjoyment, and mention nothing as _ regards creation etc.

sarge: Mega, AAT AA: TET tl RE warafa: Non-return weq on account of scriptural declaration.

22. (There is) no return (for these released souls); on account of scriptural declaration (to that effect).

If the powers of the released souls are limited, then like all limited things they too will come to an end, and consequently the released souls will have to come back from Brahmaloka to this mortal world —says the opponent. The Sutra refutes such a contingency on scriptural authority. Those who go to Brahmaloka by the path of the gods do not return from there. ‘‘Going up by that way, one reaches immortality’’ (Chh. 8. 6. 6.); ‘“They no more return to this world’? (Brih. 6. 2. 15).

The repetition of the words ‘‘No return’’ ete. is to show that the book is finished.

INDEX

INDEX TO SUTRAS

Cn. See, S. | sim aareaqzo 2 3«43 | aatsaeda auto scat 9-24 11 | Sratsrarfe fee arafarat cafto 65) 3) 33 | SAT aITaHES ATAPI 1 8B 16 | sear mate afmetarfe do 4 116 | ayERAeaTfayo arearfanfate 3 1 4 spent faerarg, geiaqeieqe §63(3obs | safer a Bafato afeearaqqade 2 2 3 | arferatqzgr BSE ayo «863g 661 | afaBmrTayTd Maa Ao = 4 1 | SRERTATTTAAa: BUAA 24 7 | wafirad ao AYA 2 4 18 | waaferzo sara afteqo 1 3 29 | saTeeaETao gagaaaatc 64 2 06 2 | syarfaeqaate sTaTa ATTHT° 3B 4 25 ayarata: WsaTo Marq aaeato 4 4 9 | afaay: aato gata aqatro «63 218 | afaerfarfio gata aeaaTO «61 2 27 | BARAeAETO HATA Gray: 1 23 0 Ba: VATTISEATY, 3 8 | HATTA EY Ao saaraasffo = 44 2 20 | BAAratigeae qyapeerasvaic 3 4 89 «Wats aTatT° orferrarral 3 8 46 waeatatafe |

Ch. Sec. S.

a 0 8 0 bo OND Ome et oe om

we ww WO ee O&O — HH

pt OS et

mH we & PD fh ey

CO =

mm Nw & =

Oo NWN

LY)

mt OS 8D OD = me Og MY og

Oo 8 © Oo tw

Ch. Sec. S.

mee & Nw

wm OS ww = Nw

“oom ~~ Bw OS OC SP = |;

| a a

we)

25 ardtat aasete 37 | SIaETAEAS 13 | SaraTe

87 | SARA THH0

to by

oo

ae ae s ©)

nS

to

aoSnNwr F&F GS Ors

eS ee ee |

CO oo m= mm bh

INDEX TO SUTRAS, BIT Ch. See. ‘ Gli Seess. aarafaat fA °o 3 4 45 wea J 2 8 a enefreege> 1 afenerey yo 1] (1g | a Gea 4 7 wera aieqado «64 28 «O11 | ATE AAPATAM 8 2 16 MEMeHRATA 1 1 22 | gaenramide 861 818 aray atfato 2 2 24 | gaveamamfgo 2 1 21 mTeTasaeato 1 8 41 | gawearcqamdo 4 1 14 BTA «84 ® | emtaereraeTTe 2 2 19 anfaarfeeero 4 3 4 gaxequarTaTo 6306 3«#18 SHE Tayo 14 26 ade eg 2 1 2 wreagetfaftas 3 8 #16 | gagrAAAT 3 8 384 areafa ado = 1s | SICANSTT A 3 8 15 | Safawasmto 1 5 18 STRAT TPMT 4 4 8 | Raldataeey 11 8 arena qaatswyo 4 61 8 STATA: 3 8 40 | SaRfastamac 1 4 21 sifeeatfanaao 4 1 «#6 | Seerfeanento 2 3 (i sraraa vate 3 3 14 | BaRTedarftdto 1 3 19 srIdeaAay© 1 1 12 | sateen a 2 2 20 10 3 8 11 | sqyeqarvaTa 2 2 AY sraurafaac 681s | Savataravafqe 62 «2 «(27 grqaiasacye 4} 4 Ud: Ss eafto 1 1 27 Sra waa 2 8 50 | BIEAAgAMTS 3 8 80 alAafedto 1 2 82 | saqaafy ao 3 4 42

Ch. Sec. S. srafsaaa faa: 2 3 87 SqMEWEWATS «8621 sqederaisapo 8 BOC safeatsaedgo 8680684) SAATAT 2 8 85 SWIM A AWW 2 2 16 SAAT TAMA 2 2 2B saaqafy a wAto 2 2 12 Swaqeqqeyixras 3 2 27 SHISMAIETAS 4B HIG AWTS 3 4 «17 TE WIAA: Ute 3 3 58 Uda ATaaTO «8682 Bt 8 ada aN Te 2 1 8 ada firstaftqo 2 6} (19 Uda Wa STC 8=—) 4 8 Ud ACAISHTSO = 2B ad gfenao 86 8a 5D UANQIMaT 4 47 Uesncameqdo 3 4 5] BULAS YO 2 2 40

Ch. Sec. S..

eat aTereas = 28 88: BAH SINTY 1 2 4 SLUNCUTAS 81 4 10 rata aTqato «61 6118 PTATETATAS 3 3 389 SFMT BTS «=—-BB BGO SMA ATHTO 7 4 14 BAATANEAS 4 BO 7 arTaieaa ao 4 8 «10 RIIATAeTO 82 B42 earaasgywas = 3 dl 8 gaeruraas = 8448 Raeartas 6821 2G

aaacandrto 81 8 385 | TieareaTeate 1 8 15 aftararearg, 1110 Wawaragyys «68829 TWATARITAS «868 BCG TUTE NEI 2 8 2 qetufaetato 86 1 2 1] an a a wad 82 8 B

agiiigaa, ado ara aR, surrfata Saito RTASATTAYo safaaenTaayo

UrTa BATS araiftarateac

Bg ScaTT BANGATITLASHS SRHTICA Aa: siageantayo TAG SIATAS AACATA AAT asa 4a earfarrafassto vatfareraara, © SIGCHG LGM sai faaaifao saifafqarara enfaaearare

a gfeqartare i at afeaista qo

INDEA ‘TO SUTRAS

Ch. re

OH

aks

aa a a ee an en ea iy, Nanas“) Speier an ee an

1, SAPS, aCTTRTATET: aAOTR AeA aatft a UZATO aura asafa AUT RATEAATO aUTSeAIfaTaya CAT OAT: aafaa Tato "ad ACAZACTAT!o Wes eats aearafaatzato azurat ATSlgo agfaeaTarzac azeaware fe aAgIsTA: GATS agaaty atatte aaTRlaTaaao ATT MARAT AE TeaIeNTA

, AyAesq Fo

| agat fararata,

afaattaiftaae afassegt alate

| Teas WITS

AAA Aeeyo

~im be & &S ww & po wv

nN

OS eet ee

wan NM & ww

CC => im CS

pm Ww ©

Ch. Sec. S aaafratc 1 3 16 CATATSS 4 1 8 ‘aa@atfaame 2 1 35 ATR: BWA 2 2 43 aaageragfto 4 3 «#14 aaqaaTeqo 862 2 OBS aaeuraaqg 1 2 19 aaifaarftenc 3 40 41 AG eeeaaaM 2 1 9 a Fat aMNTaEY 8 118 agdteafea: 4 1 4 agaaqataTd 2 1 BR A wasqHeT 2 2 30 a Warafa aeto 3 2 WL maegyenyts 61 1 2y AATAMAEATS 3 3 65 TargEapyao 3 3 7 a avatar gaye 24 9 war fataTa 382 a fare: 23 1 afanmaeateo 2 1 4 adeandaeto 1 4011 a avareararqe 3 2 OSI aeuraaisfio 863 21 TATRA Ao 2 8 2 arfafaxa fatto 3 1 28

Ch. Sec. S. | aeinftesre: 2 1 11 aea a facacaTd_ 2 4 «(16 arf ct auTeme 4 2 15 GUIMWY 38 4 «9 qarasarantio 3012] ATSACIMTAITE 2 3 10 TAM FIO 1] 4 CG FUGA 3 1 2

Seadsad WTO 4 4 0 aarafe a 33 4

arate arite 3°02 «7 TE TACTT: 1 3 14 varfaaata aR 02 1 85 yeatrg ashe 3 2 ¢ queararaato 8} 3 aiearetgygqo 64 64 «12 aa sift tt 3 2 40

aTenTeta fer AAT qearfaie ATAATAAAS aTHTa TqASY: ATAATSESATEL_ facaaa a aaa frentnaeurye faqatsa faataté a%o fafa afa Axo AaTsqITA: agfeneaqaat fe a

atTAS

qaafaaatagae qéqcaq qeaTfaRee ea: GEATATASHCITA

qUeqaeaaanig

INDEX TO SUTRAS 521 “h. See. S. _ Ch. Sec. §. v 3 arfegatat gfto 83 4 «28 1 8 3 | qeafaerartiee 3 8 24 2 2 4S | qeavalsa:meato 3 40] 3 4 13) geamsaafefao 2 2 7.


2 2 | OFWEQFAMRWEQO 2 3 12
--------------------------

4 2 6 | germaaTazealt 3 2 15 2 2 33 | garmfgaarate 3 2 25 4 2 10 | semranrfgaecat oR 2 3 46

| TETNTAAAZTS == 3-2 28 2 4 412 qafara ufastro 1 4 28 1 3 48 afaartag faye 1 4 20 9 2 Bg aararea 3.2 30 4 3 12 afawartateo 4 2 12 2 3 41 | Neaataamfafto 4 4 18 3 9 +5 | SuNsMamrfafto 361 5 3 8 52 | WAIWATeWeAMTo 4 4 «15

Ch. Sec. S. | Ch. Sec. S srafaft Sears 203 53 YR RAATTS 8 8 87 OTATTATa 3 91 38) Nasaqaarea 13 5 TUPI Ta 1 3 4 Waste: 2 4 18 gayaar wsart 2 4 15) Mateafa aetHo 3 glk MIMSAATSHTATA 1 1 28 ARTA efaaTo 2 1 13 gaat aTeao 18 O12 AATaaTeafao 4 4 21 foafecataats 3 3 «12 «Wir feto = 4 19 gana saat: «033 2 Bs | Watfasae@ATaTo 1g 8 | aeaayte 2 3 44 afeequarttsiqo 304 48 ararfaagtsfatte we Gea qwwat 893 2 83 metaagt Geto 2 211 mercfevteata 415 RNS ey ara m States 4 4 5 EMIS 2a 2 ureaafaenao 6] 61 (15 ATaTATA Fo 3.2 8 wr aT acHS 638 17 MOAT 4 ara sfafafaso 4 4 11, avez 1 3 2 wa garage «1 8 88) aMIsdaeafto «63 2 10 wramsarea gs 4 22 amafeatarAcgo 3 449 amy dawedt: 2g) 15 | FART ATS 4 SERIES § 44 14 aaa tat 2 3 40 amfeareraze 61 1 2g Tarammae 2 1 20 CY ASH_A: 4A 2 &§ | ava faaafa fe 4 1 «18 qardvarage 1 3 8) © 8 8 BR

INDEX TO SCTRAS

Ch. Sec. S. ATATMCAVTfACATS 2-38-80 aTatgart F 2 3 7 TH: TATMTISC 2 1 18 aaa: ufa ao 4 2 QF aifaa feta 1 4 27 ata: TOT 2 4 27 THATYTTT we 2 2 4 eargntareqo | 2 15 STIGWUASA =] 2 28 vaferaitsy 2 1 26 fayqaatao 383A fay 4 J} 2 wthaAego 2 1 83 qzaifa arto 14 5 ATEAT TATA 1 4 19 aTenafao 4 2 7 arqueqafago 64 63 fammeateafao 2 1 81 faneqisfafres 3 3 (59 fanrrafa Fo 4 49 faurenezieatato 1 1 «18 fantatfaata Ato 2 2 «44 fareamtifae 3 1 17

; Ch. Sec. S. faaagfaato 3 8 47 fafaal armada 8 4 20 faqudur gate 2 8 14 fanfarara 2 2 45 fanfayarsato 2 2 10 fam wat 8 4 11 faira: euatifae 1 38 2 fanfragarige 1 2 2 fara aamafa 4 3 16 faxrampnasqyo «6 2 22 farautra 1 2 12 PUIG ELL 38 4 88 faniwacaTsa 4g 3B faertiqeaTa = 284 fafgacarzato «= 88432 qfgatanTacto 863 2 (20 TaTIMATA = BBS agaddta Waedo 4 BG qTaAEapsd Fo 2 2 29 qUaAIaTTa 2 4 19 ANITA, ABIES 2 4 V2 PATA: ATATTO 1 2 24 qwadagay ao 2 184 safareetarate 3 38 54 sufararaaferto 2 2 4 safatal Tata 2 8 26 safaera faftio 3 3 37

$24 BRAHMA-SUTRAS Ch. Sec. S.

saqzyTed fisqto 9 3 36

Ch. Sec. S. dana apo 301 O13

SUA A GASH 3 8 gprs 1 8 386 afefaraaTa 86-2 g ag s a qeaefaaeato 1 3. a cammanes 6 weqayatd = 1 25 cuckoo. WeeaTatsHTAS 384 31: ae Bae cal | art haitfere 204 5 usafeelsa 1} 9 9, SARFAMTA 8 4 5 ueqita ofat: 1 8 a4) ager 2 28 MATA TA: 3 4 27 | SaTEaTe, yee dD aréteratasfizo 1 2 sa es 2 3 389 WIAA WS 1 1 30 aaa gears 3 B19 areata 91 4 | SATAMTASAS 1 8 80 rs er Oe Bandai 5 42 7 greg aqarayon sg] gs 34 |: aa: So | agea saayo 2 2 8 qreaqars 3 38 qafaaidio cline ee ceil nini -. TAATSA Soho ee — 3 4 4g SeeaTATIT TT 2 2 38 weed WSTHAS 2 1 87 aegfrasareye 3 8 23 3 mw yd | | @eanrofattfe 1 2 g watafisentae 1 2 16 | can arate aemfaadtas 33 4g | SEAMEN 2 acne 24 g | Sa 2 2 Be eaurfa a gate 3 4 84 darafiefaeds 2 4 20 | AateraMEc 3 3 i

INDEX TO SUTRAS

o wattat & GATS aah Taraay aaraar a aeRt?

aan saree qava fe stare aa fe aeato 3 aiseaat ATTIC 4 eqaisqafat = 3

qa § agecaTa_

eafaATAgTa eurafagardo KyTATASATSMTSS 1

Sec. 8

lo

M7 | enaa a

25 | enaasta a ate

paw & w OO

GENERAL INDEX

Advaita Vedantr, does

uphold Pantheism, 94. See also Vedanta. Adhyasa (Superimpositicn), objections against, answer- is due to ignorance, 9. defined by Sankara, 10-14. | according to others, 14-16. the basis of our expericnce,

Adrishta (the Unseen Prin- ciple), of the Vaiseshikas,

in what does it inhere, 203. cannot be the cause of the | first molion of the atoms, yields fruit of actions at | some future time, 446.

Aguihotra, 353, 411.

Agnirahasya, the constitute a

Air, springs from ether, 236.

the cause of fire, 237-238. See also Vayu.

Ajahat Lakshana, 296.

Aja, is not the Pradhana but causal matter, 137-140.

Ajatasatru, 146-147,

Akasa (Ether), Brahman is to be understood by the

the small,,in the heart, is Brahman, 103-110.

not

fires in, separate

external and internal, 104, | H

Akasa, the small, the Jiva retires to, in Ceep sleep,

which reveals names and forms is Brahman, 126-127.

cannot be a nonentity, 215-

not eternal, 281-285,

tke cause of air, 286.

Akshara (Imperishable), Brahman, 99-101.

Alayavijnina, 221.

Anardamaya, see ‘Self con- sisting of bliss.”

ntahkarana (the internal organ), the necessity of accepting an, 255-256.

is

Asmarathya, his views,

Asramas, all the four, enjoin- ed by the scriptures, 418,

the duties of, compulsory, persons not belonging to any of the, are also entitled to Knowledge,

Atharvanikas, their rite of carrying fire on the head,

Ativadin, who is an, 98-99.

Atman, as limited by the Upadhis is atomic ete.

is changeless, 256. knowledge of, gives Free-

Kee’ also Self and soul. Atoms, as the First Cause, refutation of the atomic theory of the Vaiseshikas, Atreya, 487. Avidya (Ignorance), the cause of all duality, 3-4. defined, 16-17. the means of right know- ledge and the scriptural texts belong to the sphere See also Maya, Nescience. Avyakta (the Undeveloped),

means causal substance and not the Pradhana,

is dependent on the Supreme Lord, 184.

in Katha 1. 8. 15 means the Supreme Self, 185-136. | Audulomi, his views in | Badarayana, vi seq. ° and the Pancharatras, xxx1

seq.

Badari, his views, 89-90, 297,

Bauddha, Idealists, 207; their views refuted, 218-222.

Realists, 207; their views refuted, 207-208.

the twofold aggregate

Bauddhas, their doctrine of universal momentariness refuted, 208 ff.

the twofold aggregate of,

of,

Bhagavata school, the, its octrines refuted, 228-280. Bhaskara 385, Bhedabhedavada, 149-150, Bhuman, is Brahman, 97-98. Birth, and death are spoken of the soul metaphorically, may take place without the five oblations, 302-808.

Body, birth and death are primarily spoken of,

the subtle, 469-471.

Brahmacharya, etc., as a

means to Knowledge, 480. Brahmaloka, attainment of,

is a step in gradual eman- cipation, 103.

‘Small Akasa’ is called, 105.

creatures daily go to, 105.

attainment of, is not pos- sible as long as there is a body, 872.

the knower of the Saguna Brahman goes after death

only the worshippers of the Saguna Brahman without a symbol go to, 494-496.

there is no return for such knowers from, 508, 512.

Brahman, causality of, ex-

plained, xxli seq.

the only Reality, 3, 174-175.

Jiva is identical with, 8,

and Maya, 4.

is not an object of the

knowledge of, results in Liberation and immorta-

GENERAL iNDEX

the substratum of Aahyasa, | scriptures have no vaiue for | the knower of, 20. | the inquiry into, 21-28. |

ig

requisites for the aspirant to the knowledge of, %

is the source of origin ete. of the world, 24 ff.

definitions of, ‘25-26.

is cognizable through the | scriptures alone and not through reasoning etc. 26, |

is the First Cause, 26 ff.,

reveals Itself on the destruc- tion of ignorance, 27, 33.

described negatively, 28.

is the main purport of all: the Vedanta texts, 30-37,

knower of, becomes one with

knowledge of, does not depend on human endea- |

meditated upon = as and sun, 84.

not the object of the act of knowing or of devout worship, 34.

is our Inner Self, 34.

injunctions have no _ place with regard to, 35-36.

mind

can be _ aill- knowing and creative through Maya,

Saguna and Nirguna, xvii seq., XxXxXIx seq., lil seq.,

the tail or support of

everything, 44-51. as the person in the sun

limitations are aagined in,

for Upasana, 58, 77-78, as Akasa (Ether), 58-55.

as Light, 56-60. as the metre Gayatri, 59-60. as the Being consisting of sniallness of, 70. as abiding in the beart, 71. does not experience pleasure au.d the individual soul, as the Itater, 72-74. Bliss,

as <listinguished by

is the Ruler within, 80-82.

is Vaisvanara, 84-91.

as the resting place of heaven, earth, etc., 92-97.

all is, 938.

is not manifold, 93-94.

as the Witness, 96.

is Bhuman, 97-99.

is Truth, 99.

is Akshara (Imperishable),

the Highest Person in Pr.

Akasa”’,

as ‘‘the = small

body is the city of, 104.

the light of all lights.

as the person of the size of the thumb, 111-118.

the Prana in Kath. 2. 6. 2

as the revealer of names and forms, 126-127.

the Nature of the Supreme,

as the Self consisting of knowledge, 127-129.

wished to be many, 144.

the Self of all, 145.

is the Self to be seen through hearing etc.,

is both the material and efficient cause of the

is the cause of the world though of a different nature is existence itself, 164, 237. objections to, being the cause of the world refut- has only apparently chang-

ed into the world, 167, the individual soul an-

image of, in the mind,

is realized in Samadhi, 174,

world is non-different from,

the world exist in, poten- tially, during Pralaya,

Cause through Maya,

the power of Maya of, established, 186. creative through sportive impulse, 187-188.

t

Le | partiality or cruelty cannot

be attributed to, 189-191. is endowed with all the attributes necessary for creation, 191-192.

the material and _ efficient

of world,

cause the

everything originates from,

1s not created, 286-287.

elements become creative through the agency of,

at Pralaya the elements are absorbed in, in the reverse

organs are produced from,

the Chief Prana is created from, 275.

the soul in dreamless sleep

nature of Supreme, 820-840.

takes form in connection with Upadhis, 824-325,

is Pure Intelligence, 325-826.

the two forms of, are denied by ‘not this, not this’ and not the Brahman Itself, 829.

is not perceived due_ to ignorance, 381.

is without a second, 836-889.

is called a bank etc. meta- phorically, 836-387.

meditations on, 855-861,

knowers of the Saguna, go by “the path of the

the departure of the knower of the Saguna, 468-469,

knowers of the Saguna, go to Brahmaloka, 477-481.

attainment of, means des- truction of ignorance,

GENERAL (NDEX

Prinas of the knower of, do not depart at death but get meiged in It,

realization of, is the result of the Vidyas, 402.

knowledge of, effects man’s highest puroose (Puru-

is not e@ part of sacrificial

the meditator on, is to com- prehend It as identical w.th himself, 447-448.

is not to identify himself with the symbol of Brih-

in meditations symbols are to be viewed as, 450.

knowledge of, destroys all |

past and future _ sins,

knower of, is not affected by good deeds, 457.

attains oneness with It on the exhaustion of Pra- rabdha Karina, 461-462.

is attained by souls who go by the path of the gods on the dissolution of Brahmaloka, 491-494.

author and date of the, vl seq.

commentators on, XI seq.

and Gita ix-xi, lix seq.

the ney for the study of the,

Buddhi Thtellect), the subtle Upadhi (adjunct) of the

Buddhism, the. three principal schools of, 207.

See also Bauddha and the Buddhists.

Buddhists, the, say that foere is no self apart from Vijnana, 14.

See also Bauddha.

Cause, effect exists in, before its origination as well as

is not polluted by the effect when the latter gets dis- solved in it, 166-167.

cffect is of the nature of, and not vice versa, 167.

the, alone is real, 174.

every, is not necessarily the effect of an anticedent thing, 287.

Cause and effect, are non-

are not similar respect, 164.

relation of, according to the Vaiseshikas, 201-202.

the Bauddha chain of,

relation of, contradicts the doctrine of momentari-

Celibacy, expiation for trans- gressing the vow of, 488-486; such transgressor to be shunned, 436.

See also Sannydsa. Ceremonies, purificatory, denied to Sudras, 128. Charvakas, 11, 896-897; refut-

Childlike state, 441-442.

in every

Consciousness, a quality of the Self, 398.

Creation, scriptures on,

is without a beginning,

Dahara_ Vidya, Death, the mode of departure of the soul at, 468-468. Deities, the presiding, of the

which conduct the soul to Brahmaloka, 487-489. See also gods. Devayana, see ‘“‘the path of gods’”’ under God. Digits, see Kalas. Dream, state, is unreal, 219, is the intermediate place, | world is the creation of the Jiva, 812.

Earth, is created from water, is meant by Anna, 238-239. Effect, see Cause and Effect. Elements, atoms and _ their respective, 206. become causes through the

agency of Brahman, reabsorption in Brahman

at Pralaya, 241-242. organs are the modifica- tions of the, 242. are created by the Lord, Emancipation, see Liberation. | Ether, see Akasa.

Fire, Brahman conceived as | gastric, 87-88. is created from air, 237-238. water is created from, 288. worshippers of the five fires | go to Brahmaloka, 496

Food, prohibited, when can See also Anna. Freedom, see Liberation.

Gayatri, is everything what- ever exists, 58.

Brahman is denoted by the metre, 59-60.

God, see Lord.

Gods, are entitled to the study of the Vedas etc.,

their corporeality, 114-115.

are capable of assuming several forms simultane- ously, 114.

are qualified for

souls become the _ food

the path of the, who go by it after death, 872-876

the path of the, the only way to Brahmaloka, 482-

stages in the path of the, by which the departing soul goes, 482-487,

the Saguna Brahman is attained by the soul who goes by the path of the,

souls which go by the path of the, attain Su- preme Brahman on _ the dissolution of Brahma-

See also Deities.

Great, see Mahat. Gunas, the three, 38, 198-199.

Vidyas, of,

Heaven, performers of sacri- fices alone go to, 292.

GENERAL INDEX

Hiranyagarbha, 102, 271, 280,

Householder, the importance of his life, 440

Immortality, is gained only by the knowledge of the Supreme Self, 149.

Iswara, is recognized hy the Yoga system, 160.

See also Lord.

Jébala Satyakima, 124. | Jaldlas, 91. | on the qualification of gods for Upasand etc 119, 120, thinks that religious mcrit brings about the fruits of actions, 341-342, the Vedas throughout pres. cribe acts according to, 408-411; this view refut- on Sannyasa, 417-418. says that the soul which goes by the path of the gods altains the Saguna Brahman, 492.

on the characteristics of the liberated soul, 500- Jainas, refuted, 222-224. Janasruti, 121-123. Jiva, see Soul. Jivanmukti, 456. Karma, the «sou. descends | from heaven with the

residual, 294-298. and good conduct, 296-298. |

the Lord is the giver of the fruits of, 840-841. Jaimini’s views on, 841-842.

Badardyana’s view on _ the

fruition of, 842-848.

itself is incapable of pro- ducing results, 342-848.

the gnod and evil, of a knower of Brahman go to his friends and enemies respectively, 868-370.

ne who has attained Know!- edge gets rid of his good and evil, at death, 370-

Sanchita and Agami, alone are destroyed through

Prarabdha, is destroyed at death, 371.

law of, does not hold good in the case of a knower of Brahman, 456.

| Karmakanda, 19, 24, 82.

Karshnajini, 296-297. Kasakritsna, 151-152. Knowledge, the means of right, belong to the sphere of Avidya, 17 ff. is not an activity of the mind, 35. depends on the thing itself, on the dawning of, the individual soul realizes its identity with Brahman, perfect, attained in Sama-

is attained through the grace of the Lord, 261. perfect, results from Nir- guna Updsana, 874. sacrifices performed with,

‘dre more powerful, 887-

of Brahman leads to Liber- ation, 408.

no work for one who has attained, 412-413.

destroys all ignorance, 416.

is gained in Sannyasa

works are an indirect means

can be attained by special

when may It come? 442-443.

destroys all past and future sins, 455-456.

cannot destroy Prarabdha works, 458. Kumarila, 885.

Liberation, is not attained by the knowledge of the empirical self, 22.

true knowledge of Self leads

is attained by knowledge of

comes from the camprehen- sion of the Vedanta texts,

knowledge of the Saguna Brahman leads to gradual,

according to the Sankhyas.

is attained by worshipping etc. Vasudeva, 228.

comes from Knowledge only, 424.

not delayed after Knowl-

Light, in Chh. 8. 18. 7 is Brah-

Brahman is the, of lights, the Highest, is Brahman,

the, attained by Jiva is the Supreme Self, 499.

Lord, the whole creation is

reabsorbed in the Sup- reme, 73.

cosmic form of the, 86-87.

is to be meditated upon in the space between the head and the chin, 91.

the Supreme, is free from the three states of wak- ing, dream, and_ deep sleep, 108.

is not affected by ignorance,

dispenses fruits of action,

the Inner Ruler, 189.

the Supreme, the soul is dependent on, for its

Knowledge attained through His grace, 261, 314.

the soul is a part of the,

the Supreme, does not create the dream world,

the Supreme, does not enjoy the fruits of actions, 880.

meditation on the cosmic form of the, 399-400.

the Supreme, abides in two

See also Brahman.

is knowledge of Brahman,

Is nothing newly acquired, | Mahat (Great), in Katha 498, 1. 8. 11 does not refer to

%ZENERAL INDEX

the Sankhyan categor 180 ff. ane means the cos.nic inteJect, refers to Self in Vedic texts,

Maheswaras, their philosopki- cal doctrines, 225-248. Maitreyi, 148-149, Maya, explained, 4 ff. is Anirvachaniya 4, 14, 134. is the result of Avidy4, 8, Brahman becomes creative is a power of Brahman, 160. the Lord is able to create the world of diversity through His power of, Brahman’s power of, estab- lished, 186.

Brahman is apparently modified through, 192. Meditation, in, on Brahman all the qualities of Brah- man, negative and other- wise, are to be combined reciprocal, 1s enjoined in

on Atman to be repeated till Knowledge dawns,

one has to practise, sitting,

Meditations connected with the members of sacrificial

in, on the members of sacri- ficial acts the idea of divi-

nity is to be superimposed are to be observed till

Meditativeness, is enjoined in

Mimamsakas (Purva), object to the definition of super- imposition, 12, 18.

uphold the intrinsic validity of all knowledge, 12.

Prabhakara school of, and superimposition, 12-18.

purport of the Vedas according to, 80-3].

say that the words of the vedas are eternal, 115.

saz; that difference of terms indicate difference in acts,

Mind, the functions of the organs are merged in, at

is not the material cause of the organs, 464.

the function of, gets merged

in Prana at death, 465-466.

Momentariness, the Bauddha doctrine of, 208, 210 ff.,

Moon, the world of, 292, 298-

Nachiketa, Yama and, 186. Naiyayikas, and superimposi- tion, 15 ff. mention atoms Cause, 170. declare the Lord to be only the efficient cause, 225. the Jiva an agent according to the, 259. their doctrine of many souls refuted, 267-269.

as. First

Nante and form, the universe and not modes of the

and its objects have, as Chief Prana, 282-283. the condition of their follow the soul at death, manifestation, 116. 290.

all mental states are condi- the functions of the, are tioned by, 116. merged in the mind at

evolved by Brahman, 127, death, 463-465. 284-285. the, of the knower of the

Nirguna Brahman _ get merged in It at death,

Narada, 97 ff., 376. Nescience, see ’ Avidya, Maya. Nihilism, illogical, 221-222. | thili Bauddha), 157, 207. Bhilists (Benedae Reriee ces Vidya, those who causality of Brahman ac- | know the, go by the path

cording to, Xxx- -XXXi. F of the gods, 374-375. the Jiva according to, Pancharatra school, see

XXXVii. Bhagavata school.

bd A A Brahman’s nature accord- | Parinamavada, 5.: ing to, xli seq., lii seq. Perception, direct, is the basis

Non- existence, 143-144, 157, of all the other means of

Person (Purusha), the highest,

Object, subject and, are | ae Pr. 5. 5 is Brahman, opposed and cannot be | 102-103. identified, 6. of the size of the thumb is

subject and, are mixed up _Brahman, 111-113. due to ignorance, 7-8. Philosophy, the six systems

the nature of, is twofold, | of, i-iv. 18. | Pitriyana, 801.

Oblations, the five, 288, | Pribhakaras, on superimposi-

Nimbarka, xili-xv.

Om, the symbol, in the | Pradhana, is made up of the Udgitha Vidya, 352, 354, | three Gunas, 86, 198-199. 404, 405, the Sankhyan First Cause,

Organs, are the effects of | 36-37. elements, 242, 272. refutation of the Sankhyan

are produced from Brah- doctrine of, 87-48, 88,

their number, 273-274. is insentient and not based are minute in size, 274-275. | on the scriptyres, 387-88, the presiding deities of the, 130 seq.

280-282. is not the ruler within, 81.

the relation between the cannot be the resting place soul and the, 281, 282. of heaven, earth, etc., are independent principles | 93-95.

GENERAL INDEX ue iy openiehable (Akshara),

Aa “does is ar independent entity,

not refer

of the Pralaya (Dissolution of world), 118. the world exists in a poten- tial form during, 178, 241. Prana in Chh. 1. 11. ae Kau.

refuted, the

Yogins

is Brahman, sei 60-68, |

125 respectively. water as the dress of, 361. Prana, the chief. (vital force)

is created from Brahman,

the chief, (vital force) is different from air and sense functions, 276-279.

Purusuartha,

to, |

the higHest, attained through Knowl-

Purusha Vidya, 866-867. Purva

Mi-

Mimamsa, mamsé.

see

Ramakrishna, Sri, 19-20. Ramanuja, xili-xv, xxxvi, 5,

causality of Brahinan ac- cording to, XXvili.

the soul according to, XXXKV-XXXVI. Bralman’ s nature accord-

ing to, xl seq., |i seq. Reasoning, cannot arrive at truth, 26. and the scriptures, 27, 82, has Deen employed by the scriptures, 82. Ritvik (Priest), 437.

the chief, (vital force)! Ruler within, is Brahman, acco'ding to the San-| 80-82.

the chief, (vital force) is Sacrifices, lead to heaven, 292. subordinate to the soul, those who do not perform, 277-278. go to the abode of Yama,

the chief, (vital force) its

function, 278-279.

the chief, (vital force) is not an instrument, 278.

the chief, (vital force) i

the functions of the mind get merged in, at death,

the functions of, get merged

in the Jiva at death,

Préanagnihotra,. 885-386.

Purusha (of the Sankhyas),

killing animals in, does not entail sin, 807.

Sadhana, (spiritual practi- ces), texts dealing with creation in Vedanta refer

is possible only during one’s life time, 372.

the destruction of good and evil results from, 372.

Samachara, 849.

Samadhi, see Meditation.

Samavaya (inseparable herence), 204.

Sampat Upasana, 90, 893.

in-

Santsira (relative existence),| Scriptures, the, are imper-

the cause of, 4. is got rid of through the knowledge of Brahman, is without a beginning, 261. Samskaras (Impressions), are impossible without the perception of objects, 220-221. require a permanent abode, Samvarga Vidya, 889. Sanatkumara, 97 ff., 876. Sandilya Vidya, 3846, 862, Sankhyas, their First Cause, refutation of their doctrine of the Pradhana, 87-48, the categories of the, not mentioned in the Vedas, Sankhya Smriti, its authority refuted, 158-160. Sannyasa, Knowledge is gain- ed in Sannyasa-~ Asrama, is prescribed by the scrip- there is no reverting back to former hfe from, 482-

external

expiatory ceremony for breaking the vow of,

Sannyasins, need not perform

rites etc., 423-424. Sat, is Brahman, 88.

refers to an _ intelligent principle, 89-42.

Satyabhedavada, see Audu- lomi.

sonal and infallible, 10, deny only the absolute validity of perception, 10,

belong to the sphere of

Avidya, 17-18.

are the only proof about

declare that one ignorant of them cannot know Brahman, 29.

employ reasoning, 82.

their aim is to describe Brahman and not the

Self, as subject and object,

is proved by _ intuitive knowledge, 9.

is realized through Sadha-

is Brahman, 22.

_ the empirical, and the real

knowledge of the, liberates,

consisting of bliss,

consisting of knowledge 1s Brahman, 127-129.

to be seen through hearing etc. is Brahman, 148-158.

injunctions etc. when pos- sible with reference to,

there is no confusion of the fruit of actions due to unity of the, 265-266.

is separate from the body,

is not an agent, 411-412.

no work is prescribed for a knower of the, 414-415.

GENERAL iNDEX

knowledge of the, is antago- nistic to work 416. See also Bruhmen.:

Sense organs, are created, 271.

are directed by the soul, yg

Skandhas, the tive, Bauddhas, 208.

the five, and atoms cannot aggregate by themselves,

Sleep, deep or dreamless | (Sushupti), the Jiva in, |

the seat of, 815-317.

Smritis and Sruti, 86, 158-

prohibit the studying of the Vedas etc. by Sudras, 124. |

Soul, (the individual), is in | reality identicai with | Brahman, XXXI11-XXXV,

of the

identifi.s itself with bodys | experiences pleasure difference between, Brahman, 71-72. | difference between, and the Supreme Lord is due to

and

and

Nescience, 82, 180, experiences the fruits of good and evil actions, 96. daily goes into the small Akasa in deep sleep, 105. is free from evil etc. only as non-different from Brahman, 109. and Brahman acc. to vari- |

ous schools of Vedaita,

had always had a previous existence, 190.

Jainas on, 228-224.

directs the sense orgens, the, is not created but

birth and death ar. meta- phorically spoken of the, ace. to Vaiseshikas, 246. is not the subject-matter of the scriptures, 248. conjunction of the, and the intellect exists in its relative state, 253-255. in dream state, part or reflection of the connection between the, and the organs is permanent, cannot create, 285. its departure at death, 287- its descent from heaven, in a swoon, 819-820. the released, only manifests its real nature, 497-499. its characteristics, 500-502. in Brahmaloka, 508-512. Souls, are different from one another, 265-266. refutation of the doctrine of many all-pervading, 267- perfected, are reborn for some Divine Mission, 376-

Which have attained | Brahmaloka, on its dis- solution attain Brahman, there is no_ return for released, from Brahma- | loka, 512. Sraddha, water is called,

Srutis, see Scriptures. Subject, see Object. Sudras, not entitled to the

study of the’ Vedas, 121-

Superimposition, see Adhydsa. Sushumna (nerve), 469. the knower of the Saguna Brahman goes out through the, 475-477. Sushupti, see sleep, deep. Sutras, iv-v.

Udgitha, meditations on, 421,

to be viewed as the sun,

Udgitha Vidya, 851-358, 398.

and the symbol Om, 852,

Upanishads, and Mayavada, xivill seq. speak of two -types of Brahman, 483.

the subject-matter of the, is Brahman, 96. Upasanas, are not parts of sacrifices, 887-888. connected with - sacrificial acts are valid for all Saikhas, 898-399. enhance the result of sacri- fices, 406.

Vaiseshikas, their philosophi- cal views and their refuta-

Vaisvanara, is Brahman, 84 Vajasaneyins, 86-87, 147, 862, Vasudeva, 298-299, Vayu, see Air. Vedas, have no value for the knower of Brahman, 20. the study of, is a_ pre- requisite for Vedanta and Purva Mimamsa, 24. prescribe acts, 80-31. who are entitled to the the world created from the, are eternal, 115-117. Vedanta, holds the identity of the soul and Brahman, room for reasoning in, 28. being based on the Srutis is more authoritative than the Sankhya Smriti, 168.

Vedanta texts, give the knowledge of the real nature of the Self, 19, 23, ois

the main purport of the, 1s

are the only’ proof of Brahman, 36.

refer to an intelligent prin- ciple as the First Cause,

there is no conflict in the, with respect to Brahman as the First Cause, 142-

GFNERAL INDEX 54)

teach tac Supreme Self, | Weking state, is real in com- Ali -412. | parison with dreams, °219-

Videhamukti, knuower of: 220). of Brahman uatvains, 447. | Ve heat lisa pile Vidya, Mu. 3. 1. 1 and Kath; earth created irom,.

Brih. 8. 4. 1 and 8. 5. 1 form we the drese-of Prana, 861.

One Pees: ‘Word, the relation between Brih, 5. 4. 1 and 5. 5. 2 form and ite object is eternal, Vidyas (Upasanas), what are; the world originates from, with identical or similar | Work, on whom the scriptures forms are one Vidya, 845- enjoin, 414, 416. 350. the xnower of the Self is not purticulars of identical, | bound by the effects of, mentioned in different | 415. places are to be combined’ an indirect means to into one meditation, 3850- Knowledge, 424-426. 351. ' has no part in producing

Liberation, 424.

having different subject- the results of obligatory, is

matter are different, 351-

3538. not destroyed by Know!]- identical, m the same| edge, 459-460. _ Sakha have to be com- regular, contributes _ to

Knowledge indirectly, 460. done with a desire does not help the origination of

bined, 362. various, like the SAndilya

etc. are to he kept Knowledge, 460.

separate, 400-401. sacrificial, not combined one is to be selected from with meditations also

among the, relating to helps in the origination

Brahman, 401-402. of Knowledge, 460-461. yielding particular desires all, including Prarabdha of

may or may not be com- the Knower of Brahman

bined, 402-403. are destroyed at death, scriptural statements refer- 462.

ring to, enjoin meditation, See also Karma.

420-422. World, the, originates from

Viraja, 371. ae e A. A Msishtadvaitavada, 5. does not become absolutely

ital force, see Prina. | non-existent at Pralaya,

the words of the Vedas,

Rrahman is the material; the external, is not al- and efficient cause of the,| together non-existent, 218-

175, 178. Yoga; Smriti, refutation of, exists in Brahman even 160-16],

before creation, 165. Yoga-Sutras, 28, is an illusion, 167. Yogins, 225, is without a beginning,| the limitations as to time

190-191. for the mode of departuré

existed in former cycles, at death apply to the,